=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
232 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 23, NO. 2, APRIL 2007
Complementary Stability and Loop Shaping for
Improved Human–Robot Interaction
Stephen P. Buerger and Neville Hogan
Abstract—Robots intended for high-force interaction with hu-
mans face particular challenges to achieve performance and sta-
bility. They require low and tunable endpoint impedance as well
as high force capacity, and demand actuators with low intrinsic
impedance, the ability to exhibit high impedance (relative to the
human subject), and a high ratio of force to weight. Force-feedback
control can be used to improve actuator performance, but causes
well-known interaction stability problems. This paper presents a
novel method to design actuator controllers for physically interac-
tive machines. A loop-shaping design method is developed from a
study of fundamental differences between interaction control and
the more common servo problem. This approach addresses the in-
teraction problem by redefining stability and performance, using
a computational approach to search parameter spaces and dis-
playing variations in performance as control parameters are ad-
justed. A measure of complementary stability is introduced, and
the coupled stability problem is transformed to a robust stability
problem using limited knowledge of the environment dynamics (in
this case, the human). Design examples show that this new measure
improves performance beyond the current best-practice stability
constraint (passivity). The controller was implemented on an inter-
active robot, verifying stability and performance. Testing showed
that the new controller out-performed a state-of-the-art controller
on the same system.
Index Terms—Actuators, control systems, force control, haptics,
man–machine systems, robots.
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
INTIMATE physical interaction and cooperation with hu-
mans is an exciting and challenging frontier of robotics.
Robotic therapy is a rapidly emerging application which
has already proven effective even in limited forms [1], [2].
Robots capable of safe, controllable physical interaction enable
this application, as well as haptic devices [3], teleoperated
master–slave systems [4], [5], and advanced applications such
Manuscript received January 20, 2006; revised August 22, 2006. This paper
was recommended for publication by Associate Editor P. Rocco and Editor K.
Lynch upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was supported
in part by a National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship, in
part by the Burke Medical Research Institute, in part by the National Institutes
of Health under Grant R01-HD37397, and in part by the Spinal Cord Injury
Board of New York State.
S. P. Buerger is with the Intelligent Systems, Robotics and Cybernetics
Group, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM 87185 USA (e-mail:
sbuerge@sandia.gov).
N. Hogan is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering and the Depart-
ment of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: neville@mit.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TRO.2007.892229
as fully programmable exercise machines and cooperative as-
sembly systems. However, in developing therapy robot modules
to treat more functions and limbs [6], [7], we have observed
that actuator technology is the most prominent limiting factor.
Sensor technology [8] has improved dramatically in recent
decades (partly enabled by microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS) technology), computational capacity continues to
grow following Moore’s Law [9], but advances in actuator
technology have lagged behind. This limitation is particularly
acute as we consider high-force haptics, machines capable of
generating forces up to a human’s body weight while providing
a gentle, compliant behavior. This requires actuators with
low and tunable endpoint mechanical impedance as well as
high force density (the ratio of force capacity to weight), but
available technologies (e.g., electromagnetic, hydraulic, pneu-
matic) generally excel in at most one of these capacities. In this
paper, we consider the design of feedback-control strategies to
improve and/or sculpt actuator behavior. We expose challenges
of the interaction control problem that have hampered design
of effective controllers, and propose a novel design method
to shape controller dynamics for improved performance and
stability.
We define physical interaction between a controlled system
and another object to occur when the static or dynamic prop-
erties of the system formed by coupling the two together differ
significantly from those of the controlled system in isolation.
Interacting systems often exchange significant energy, but en-
ergy transfer is not necessary to create interaction; for example,
a robot pushing on a completely rigid wall transfers no net en-
ergy, but is dynamically quite different from the same robot in
isolation. Interaction can alter both performance and stability of
the controlled system; that is, a system that is stable and satisfies
performance objectives in isolation may be unstable or perform
inadequately when coupled to another system [10].
Although interaction control has been investigated for several
decades, the available design tools remain substantially more
cumbersome and less effective than those used for classical
servo design. Most controllers for interacting systems either
regulate force directly or regulate static and dynamic behavior
at the interaction port, the location of interaction. Whitney
first introduced control based on measured force signals in
the late 1970s [11]. Work on direct force control spans a wide
range of possible forms, including proportional [12], pure
integral (I) [13], [14], proportional-integral (PI) [15], propor-
tional-derivative [16], model-based control [15], and controllers
with interior motion-control loops [17]. However, a widely
accepted framework to determine the tuning of gains or the
placement of controller poles and zeros is lacking. Most prior
1552-3098/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
BUERGER AND HOGAN: COMPLEMENTARY STABILITY AND LOOP SHAPING FOR IMPROVED HUMAN–ROBOT INTERACTION 233
literature in force control argues the merits of one controller
form or another without providing a systematic framework to
guide controller design.
A generally more robust approach to interaction control reg-
ulates dynamic behavior at the interaction port. While conven-
tional motion and force control regulate variables that depend on
both interacting systems, this approach regulates properties that
depend solely on the controlled system, independent of the en-
vironment. One such property is mechanical impedance,1 which
determines an output force (torque) time function from an input
velocity (angular velocity) time function at the same port. Early
work on impedance control [18] assumed that it was possible
to achieve arbitrary impedance, and it was postulated that sta-
bility could be guaranteed by making a robot emulate a physical
system that was itself known to be stable in performing the task
(e.g., a damped spring). The impedance could also be sculpted
to achieve task performance, for example, maximizing energy
transfer [18] or representing “virtual objects” [3], [10].
Unfortunately, it proved to be impossible to achieve truly
arbitrary impedance on any real robotic device, regardless of
sensor, actuator, or control implementations. In practice, when
a controller attempts to emulate dynamics that differ signifi-
cantly from the intrinsic hardware dynamics, an increased risk
of coupled or contact instability arises [19]. This has been ex-
plained using the concept of passivity (defined in [20]). Col-
gate proved that when two stable systems with passive port
functions are physically coupled together, stability is guaran-
teed [20]. Because many physical objects are passive (including
all combinations of inertias, dampers, springs, and constraints),
a stable robot with passive port impedance can couple stably
to an extremely large and useful set of environments, making
passivity a desirable property. However, Colgate showed that
if endpoint force feedback is used to reduce apparent endpoint
inertia by more than 50% below its physical value, the system
becomes nonpassive. This limitation results from dynamics (re-
gardless of characteristic frequency) between the force sensor
and the actuator, holds regardless of implementation, and se-
verely limits the performance of force controllers and most ad-
vanced impedance controllers [21]. Discrete control, time de-
lays, actuator and sensor limitations, and unmodeled dynamics
can also compromise passivity, making the implementation of
passive control on real systems extraordinarily challenging.
Recognizing the fundamental limit on apparent inertia
reduction, Newman introduced natural admittance control
(NAC), an approach that permits reduction of apparent friction
independent from inertia, facilitating the design of theoretically
passive friction-rejecting interaction controllers [22]. In theory,
passivity (and therefore, coupled stability) is ensured if the
target inertia is kept above half the physical value, and per-
formance is manipulated by adjusting other target impedance
parameters. Because NAC provides a means of addressing
both stability and performance in a joint framework, it offers
a significant improvement on earlier methods. Yet NAC falls
well short of classical tools for servo control design (e.g., root
1Impedance is generally denoted by the operator Z, and its inverse, the me-
chanical admittance, by the operator Y. Both are examples of port functions,
which define behavior at ports of interaction by providing a relationship between
input and output energy variables.
Fig. 1. Block diagram representation of a typical servo-controlled system.
H(s) is a scalar-valued complex transfer function of the Laplace variable sthat
represents the open-loop input–output plant dynamics. G (s) is a controller
transfer function. A reference command r is compared with the measured
output x, and the error is input to the controller. The controller output userves
as the input to the plant.
locus, frequency response design) in the accurate and simul-
taneous analysis of the effect of control parameters on both
stability and performance. Potential threats to stability such
as noncollocation, time delay, etc., cannot easily be included;
the target inertia is the only measure of passivity or stability
and the only parameter that can be intelligently designed for
stability margin.
We argue that deficiencies of the tools available for control
design are a significant factor limiting the development of
physically interactive robotic technology. This paper articulates
fundamental differences between the interaction problem and
the more common servo control problem as the source of the
design difficulties, introduces a method to approximate clas-
sical loop-shaping design for interacting systems, and provides
a method to incorporate limited knowledge of the environ-
ment to improve performance. Section II exposes structural
differences between servo and interaction control, and makes
the fundamental point that even when analysis is restricted to
single-input, single-output (SISO) systems and even when the
robot and environment are both exactly modeled, servo control
design procedures do not translate directly to the interaction
problem. In Section III, a procedure is introduced that provides
one way to approximate loop-shaping design for interacting
systems. Section IV introduces a stability measure for use with
the new design method that applies knowledge of the environ-
ment dynamics to improve performance. Section V describes
the validation on robotic hardware of a controller designed with
the new procedure, and compares it with a natural admittance
controller. Conclusions are presented in Section VI.
II. CLASSICAL AND INTERACTION CONTROL
Key differences between servo and interaction control require
that the two problems be treated with different tools. The dif-
ferences are most easily demonstrated using scalar functions.
SISO controller design, covered in detail in many textbooks
(e.g., [23]), consists of shaping controller dynamics to achieve
suitable performance and stability margin. Given a realistic rep-
resentation (often a mathematical model) of sensors, actuators,
and system dynamics, including the primary source(s) of insta-
bility, familiar tools such as Bode, Nyquist, or root locus anal-
ysis can be applied. Given the linear SISO servo system shown
in block diagram form in Fig. 1, two key features can be high-
lighted that enable design with these tools. The first is that al-
though closed-loop stability and performance determine actual
system behavior, both can be predicted and characterized using
the open-loop transfer function (OLTF) . Bode, Nyquist,
and root locus all provide ways to translate properties of the
OLTF to the closed-loop system, such that manipulation of the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
234 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 23, NO. 2, APRIL 2007
Fig. 2. Block diagram representation of a robot coupled to an environment.
Because the robot is represented by an impedance Z , the environment is rep-
resented by an admittance (Y ).
former produces predictable effects on the latter. The second key
feature is that the controller appears as a direct multiplier of
the plant in the OLTF, such that changes to the controller pre-
dictably change the open-loop magnitude and phase, and there-
fore, stability and performance. In SISO loop-shaping design,
performance, stability, and controller complexity are traded off
by placing controller poles and zeros and tuning the loop gain.
Here we show that these two features are absent from the inter-
action problem, and that controller design is therefore hindered.
A. Limits of Input–Output Formulation
A first impulse to model an interacting closed-loop system
might be to add an “environment” block to the right of Fig. 1,
such that the output serves as the input to the environ-
ment. However this would imply an assumption that contact
with the environment does not affect the controlled system’s
input–output behavior, which directly contradicts the definition
of physical interaction provided in Section I. Instead, it is
necessary to incorporate any environment dynamics into the
model used to derive Fig. 1, generally embedding them in the
plant (an example is carried out in [24]). With this approach,
it is possible in theory to derive a stable controller. However,
the result would only be valid for a single, precisely modeled
environment, and it would be rare to find an environment that
could be characterized as accurately and confidently as nec-
essary. With uncertainty in the parameters or particularly the
structure of the environment, this approach is even less viable
[24]. Direct application of servo techniques to this input–output
model of interaction is of little value.
B. Stability and Performance
Input–output block diagram analysis is cumbersome for
interaction problems because loading requires independent
derivation of a full set of state equations for each environment.
Port functions provide a superior means of representing coupled
physical systems in block diagram form, because they are based
on conjugate power variables, such that their connection implies
no assumption about loading [25]. Fig. 2 shows a block dia-
gram model of two coupled single-degree-of-freedom (DOF)
systems, a robot and an environment, represented by their port
functions. The block diagram representation resembles Fig. 1
in its equivalence to a unity negative feedback system, with the
OLTF (or ). The system can be analyzed by applying
classical SISO tools to this function. However, the use of these
methods for design is inhibited by several factors.
Because Fig. 2 provides an exact feedback representation of
the interacting system, stability is determined by the poles of
the closed-loop system, or the roots of . Nyquist
plots of can be used to evaluate stability, and can also be
cautiously used to determine some measure of the “distance to
instability” or the stability margin, though this measure does not
translate directly to a scaled controller gain in this case, and must
be interpreted carefully, as shown in below.
Performance, on the other hand, requires alternative measures
to those used for servo systems. For the system in Fig. 1, per-
formance is measured by the relationship between the input
variable and the output variable , whether or not a control
loop is closed. Those measures do not apply to the system in
Fig. 2, partly because the model features no relevant input and
output. Further, while measures of interactive performance may
vary with system and task, they are best determined by the be-
havior of the controlled robot alone. When a robot is expected
to manage interaction with several different or uncertain envi-
ronments, to specify performance based on behavior of the cou-
pled system (e.g., natural frequencies, damping) can be imprac-
tical; for instance, it is unrealistic (and probably undesirable)
to expect comparable dynamic behavior when a robot moves in
free space as when it pushes against a rigid constraint, yet both
tasks may be needed for some applications. For human-interac-
tive robots, the robot port behavior, colloquially termed “feel,”
is usually the best way to represent desired performance [24].
Haptic devices, for example, depend on their ability to emulate
appropriate static and dynamic properties to render virtual ob-
jects; these properties are quantified by the port function. Thus,
quite aside from any stability benefit, the desire to directly reg-
ulate port behavior is an important motivation for impedance
control.
In terms of the notation of Fig. 2, if performance is measured
on the basis of robot behavior alone (and we argue that it usu-
ally should be), then it is related to but not to ; it is com-
pletely independent of the environment. Performance depends
exclusively on the portion of the OLTF related to the robot, and
performance measures should reflect this. The robot dynamics
play a critical role in determining both interaction stability and
performance, while the environment dynamics are equally crit-
ical to stability but irrelevant to performance. Controller design
must consider two quantities: the OLTF , which determines
stability, and the robot impedance , which exclusively deter-
mines performance. This is the first major difference between
servo and interaction control.
C. Control and Port Functions
A second major difference between the servo and interaction
control transfer function structures hampers predictable manip-
ulation of closed-loop dynamics through the interaction con-
troller. Unlike in the system of Fig. 1, the controller does not
appear as a multiplier in the OLTF; in fact, no controller ap-
pears directly in the interaction problem as formulated in Fig. 2.
The effect of any controller (if there is one) is embedded in ,
which also includes the model of the physical robot. If the robot
hardware is assumed to be a generic “black box” system, with an
actuator driving one side and an interaction port at the other, this
can be represented with a “two-port” (a system with two power
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
BUERGER AND HOGAN: COMPLEMENTARY STABILITY AND LOOP SHAPING FOR IMPROVED HUMAN–ROBOT INTERACTION 235
Fig. 3. Generic two-port. The force and velocity at the actuator side, F and
v , respectively, and at the environment side, F and v , are shown. In between
are arbitrary dynamics. Such a model can be used for any SISO robot.
interfaces that can be connected to other systems), as shown in
Fig. 3.
If the robot model is assumed linear, the two-port can be de-
fined by a matrix of transfer functions relating the velocity and
force at each port to each other
(1)
Each of the entries are transfer functions. Here the actuator
is assumed to be a force source, and the environment interface
is in impedance causality. If the port variables , , and are
fed back and multiplied by compensator transfer functions ,
, and , respectively, the resulting control law is
(2)
If this is applied to (1), the output impedance at port 2 is
(3)
This shows the relationship between the compensators
and the port function. None of the individual compensators
(and no combination of them) appears multiplicatively in the
port impedance . No controller enters linearly into either
the OLTF (the quantity that determines stability), or
(which determines performance), and there is no straightfor-
ward way to manipulate the magnitude and phase of either
through the controller. A change to the magnitude and phase of
, for instance, transforms the magnitude and phase of in a
complicated way that depends on each of the transfer functions
as well as on and .
With specific model parameters, stability can be checked
using a Nyquist plot, but the contour cannot be reshaped in a
straightforward way by altering the compensators. That is why
servo tools are ineffective for interaction controller design. This
limitation persists even with the assumption of a complete and
exact model of the environment ; it is fundamental to analysis
with port functions, which are required to represent interaction
in block diagrams. This feature also impacts the interpretation
of stability margins: while a significant distance of a coupled
system’s Nyquist plot from the 1 point may offer some coarse
indication of stability robustness, this information cannot be
translated directly into controller gain or phase, because these
quantities may be related in a highly nonlinear way to the port
function. Thus, even as an analysis tool, the Nyquist plot has
limited value for interactive systems.
Summarizing, in general, SISO tools cannot effectively be ap-
plied to design interaction controllers for stability and perfor-
mance. The elegance that gives these methods their utility for
servo design is lost for interactive design. This is true even for
simple SISO robot models, and even in the unlikely case when
the environment is well modeled.
III. COMPUTATIONAL LOOP SHAPING
Because classical SISO tools cannot be applied directly to de-
sign interaction controllers, alternative methods to facilitate the
tradeoff of stability and performance are needed. This section
introduces one approach, modeled on loop shaping, that lever-
ages computing power to explore a large set of possible combi-
nations of control parameters. Because there is no obvious way
to consider stability and performance as properties of a single
quantity (as in the servo problem), they are treated separately
before assembling a composite set of results. Measures of sta-
bility and performance are established, and constrained opti-
mization is used to search the controller parameter space for
solutions that maximize performance while satisfying a stability
constraint. The procedure may be repeated to explore changes to
the controller structure. The results suggest nonobvious control
implementations that can improve performance substantially, as
shown in the examples.
Like virtually all controller design and analysis approaches,
this method requires a representation of the system to be con-
trolled. It may be arbitrarily complex to satisfy the requirements
of a particular problem or application but, at a minimum, it must
include the primary source of instability. In the examples below,
coupled stability problems originate from attempts to change
the robot’s apparent port impedance using force feedback. To
represent this problem, a model must include at least one res-
onance between the actuator and the sensor;2 a simple iner-
tial model as used in [22] is inadequate. In addition to repre-
senting the physical system, a form must be assumed for the
controller. This must include at least one variable parameter
(and possibly many). It may be helpful for at least one param-
eter to vary monotonically with performance (e.g., an error-cor-
rection gain), but this is not essential. Because the frequency
response of the robot port impedance is used for the examples,
the robot model and controller are assumed to be linear. Non-
linear models could be used in principle, assuming stability and
performance can be adequately quantified, but as yet have not
been tested. The computational loop-shaping framework per-
mits various measures of stability. For interaction, stability must
be guaranteed when coupled to any expected environment(s).
Measures should be selected based on the application, but the
stability constraint should not be so conservative as to hinder
performance. In Example 1, passivity is used, while Section IV
describes a new measure that reduces conservatism.
Performance can be quantified by a desired port function; per-
formance error is the deviation from this target function. High
admittance has been used as a performance objective for inter-
acting systems, derived from a desire for low contact forces [22].
Here the deviation from the magnitude of the desired impedance
(the inverse of admittance) is used; there is no compelling reason
to use the phase, and several factors complicate its inclusion
[24]. Fig. 4 shows the magnitude and phase of the endpoint
impedance for two mechanical systems. The solid trace shows
2Colgate showed that passivity is lost at the same gain level regardless of the
complexity of the structural dynamics [21].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
236 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 23, NO. 2, APRIL 2007
Fig. 4. Port impedance magnitude and phase for a lightly damped mass (target
behavior) and a single-resonance system with large mass and damping. The
shaded region represents the error.
the impedance of a two-mass, single-resonance system (as in
Fig. 6) with large inertia (6 kg total) and damping (24 Ns/m
total). The dashed trace shows the impedance of a single, lightly
damped mass (1 kg with 1 Ns/m damping), representing a target
impedance. On the magnitude plot, the region between the two
is shaded to show the error. Below approximately 2 r/s, the dif-
ference between the two curves results primarily from the differ-
ence in damping. At frequencies between 10 and 200 r/s, inertia
dominates, and the difference in offset is due to the difference
in apparent inertia. At higher frequencies, the resonance of the
two-mass system is apparent. Beyond resonance, a controller
can have little or no effect on the endpoint because its action is
attenuated by the intermediate dynamics. The phase plot shows
the difference in the break frequencies of the systems at low
frequencies, and the resonance of the two-mass system around
600 r/s. If the system is controlled to reduce apparent inertia and
becomes nonpassive, the phase exceeds close to resonance
(e.g., see Example 2), and the phase error increases, even as the
apparent friction and inertia are reduced. This is one reason that
phase is not generally useful as a performance measure.
An optimal controller would minimize the deviation from
the desired impedance over the relevant frequencies, the shaded
area in Fig. 4. A cost function that reflects this for a discrete
vector of frequencies between and is
(4)
Practice dictates that a log-log scale provides the most useful
balance between high- and low-frequency magnitude com-
ponents, so the frequency vector is logspaced. and
reflect the actual and target port impedance, respec-
tively, and are normalized by 1 Ns/m to render them unitless.
is a scalar weighting function of frequency valued
between zero and unity, and is selected by the designer. The
weighting function provides a means to emphasize certain
frequencies to customize a solution, for example, to reject a
resonance. Frequency bounds can also be selected to tailor a
solution; here they are chosen to span from several decades
below all resonances to the highest frequencies where control
can impact impedance. When , is proportional
to a discrete approximation of the shaded area in Fig. 4. The
proposed performance measure appears to be adequate for the
applications we have investigated. However, it could easily
be adapted or augmented to suit alternative applications and
systems without compromising the proposed design method.
Indeed, any measure that can be modeled and changes with
performance is sufficient, though the interpretation of results is
facilitated if the cost measure is intuitively (e.g., monotonically)
related to a physically meaningful quantity.
The computational design procedure takes the following
steps.
1) A parameterized robot model is assumed.
2) A measure of stability is established, including a model of
the environment, if necessary.
3) A performance measure is defined, including a vector of
relevant frequencies.
4) A form for the controller is assumed, with variable param-
eters . For each parameter, a range of values is chosen.
5) For every possible combination of control parameter
values, stability is evaluated.
6) If a parameter set is unstable, it is eliminated from further
consideration.
7) If a parameter set is stable, performance is evaluated and
stored.
8) The stable combination of parameters that yields the lowest
cost is selected as the best controller.
9) If necessary, the resolution or range of controller parame-
ters is adjusted and the process is repeated.
Depending on the number of parameters varied, the results
can be displayed in various ways to view trends due to changing
parameter values. If a single parameter (e.g., a gain) is mono-
tonically related to both stability and performance in the range
of interest, a stability boundary can be located in the space of
for each combination of the remaining parameters. This en-
ables output in the form of one or more “design surfaces” that
illustrate the effects of shaping controller dynamics on perfor-
mance, and affords a definition of a gain-based stability margin.
A practical example follows.
Example 1: Loop Shaping for Passive Robot Control: In
this example, force feedback is used to reduce the apparent
impedance of a single-DOF robot while maintaining passivity
of its interaction port. The controller is for a robot module
(Fig. 5) used as a portion of a physical therapy robot [26].
The module is backdrivable, but has substantially higher po-
sition-dependent Coulomb friction (up to 20 N; target is 2 N)
and inertia (6 kg; target is 1 kg) than desired. Force measured
by a transducer at the handle of the robot is fed back such that
the motor is used to reduce the apparent endpoint impedance.
Previous work used proportional force feedback on this robot
[26]; this example demonstrates the insights gained by the new
method and the performance improvement that results from
shaping the controller dynamics.
A linear robot model, depicted in Fig. 6, is used to facili-
tate the use of the necessary computational tools. A first struc-
tural resonant mode and linear damping are modeled; the sig-
nificant nonlinear Coulomb friction is left unmodeled. The port
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
BUERGER AND HOGAN: COMPLEMENTARY STABILITY AND LOOP SHAPING FOR IMPROVED HUMAN–ROBOT INTERACTION 237
Fig. 5. Screw-driven linear robot module.
Fig. 6. Single structural resonance robot model with force transducer dy-
namics. The actuator provides the force F . The spring k and damper b
represent the first structural resonant mode, while the mass is split between m
and m , whose positions are measured by x and x , respectively. b and b
represent damping to ground. F is the applied force due to interaction with the
environment, while k and b represent the dynamics of the force transducer.
impedance is determined by the dynamic ratio of the endpoint
force to velocity at the port
(5)
Once the control law is applied to determine , the port
impedance can be derived from equations of motion; the com-
plete port impedance as well as the numerical parameter values
used for the example are provided in the Appendix.
For this example, the target impedance is zero at all
frequencies; this is equivalent to “pure” force control. This sim-
plifies the controller, as only force feedback is needed; the ex-
ample is extended to nonzero impedance in [24]. Because the
log of zero cannot be computed, (4) must be adjusted for this
special case and the alternative measure below is used
(6)
Performance is not weighted with frequency, so . A
logarithmically spaced vector of frequencies ranging from 10
to 10 r/s is used. Theoretically, this cost may be less than zero;
however, smaller costs are always preferred. This measure is
most useful for ranking candidates rather than as an intrinsically
meaningful absolute measure. Impedance plots can be examined
Fig. 7. Normalized cost at stability boundary versus pole and zero location.
to improve understanding of the effects of specific controllers,
as illustrated below.
A controller with a single pole and a single zero is used
(7)
This controller has three adjustable parameters : the zero
frequency , the pole frequency , and the DC gain .
In the region of interest, is monotonically (though not
linearly) related to performance and stability; for fixed and
, as increases, performance improves while the system
becomes “less passive.” This controller form admits lead, lag,
and proportional control, depending on the relative values of
and , permitting the exploration of a range of different con-
trollers with relatively few parameters. Root frequencies were
tested from 0.1 r/s, which is well below any significant robot
dynamics, to 10 r/s, which is above the dominant frequency of
the structural dynamics; selection of parameter ranges required
no assumptions about the system other than knowledge of
the resonant dynamics. To locate the stability boundary for
each combination of the values of and , the range of
was chosen to include both stable and unstable solutions. By
exploring controllers of various shapes and parameters, this
approach approximates loop-shaping design.
For each set of parameters, the port impedance is com-
puted, with , and evaluated along a vector of frequen-
cies encompassing all relevant dynamics to determine passivity
of the interaction port. If the real part of the port impedance is
greater than zero at all frequencies
(8)
then the port impedance is “positive real” and strictly passive
(see [20]). If the real part of the port impedance is less than zero
at any frequency, the particular controller renders the system
nonpassive, and therefore, this stability measure is not satis-
fied; that is, there exist passive objects which will destabilize
the robot upon contact.
The computational loop-shaping algorithm was used to
search a range of values for , , and . The results are
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
238 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 23, NO. 2, APRIL 2007
Fig. 8. Lag compensator’s effect on robot port impedance.
plotted on the design surface in Fig. 7, which shows the cost
with the maximum stable gain for each combination of
values for and . The cost is normalized such that any cost
less than one reduces apparent impedance; where the cost is
lower, performance is better. On the diagonal , the pole
and zero cancel out, yielding proportional control. Performance
is best when low-frequency lag compensation is used, with
a very low-frequency pole and a higher frequency zero. The
placement of the zero has a strong effect on performance. The
algorithm dictates that a zero around 6 r/s is optimal (with a
normalized cost of 0.72), a far-from-obvious result. The plot in
Fig. 7 shows that performance continues to improve as the pole
is moved to the lowest tested frequency. Indeed, further testing
confirmed that the best performance was obtained when the
pole was moved all the way to zero [ in (7)], turning the
lag compensator into a PI controller; at this extreme, the cost
was 0.63 [24]. Because performance is best with a zero at 6 r/s,
PI control is superior to pure I control. In this case, the lead
region, where , shows little promise.
Fig. 8 shows the port impedance magnitude and phase under
the lag controller specified by the loop-shaping algorithm, along
with the uncontrolled impedance. Also plotted is a proportional
controller with a loop gain of one, which provides a 50% reduc-
tion in apparent inertia, the limiting value for passivity. The lag
controller is particularly effective at reducing the low-frequency
impedance, where friction dominates. The phase stays between
and , confirming that the interaction port behavior is
passive. The apparent inertia at the stability boundary is approx-
imately 3 kg (half the physical value, as expected at the limit for
passivity).
The controller boosts the compensation where possible
without compromising passivity, while limiting feedback in the
frequency range where it is most destabilizing. The algorithm
provides a nonobvious frequency-domain “shape” for the
controller (through the placement of the control zero) in spite
of the nonlinear relationship between the controller dynamics
and port impedance. Note that the effect of the controller on
the impedance magnitude and phase are not obvious by inspec-
tion or by applying classical tools, so the numerical method
facilitates the design process.
IV. COMPLEMENTARY STABILITY
To further improve performance, it is necessary to relax pas-
sivity and replace it with an alternative measure of interaction
stability. While human-interactive robots must accommodate an
uncertain environment, the dynamic behavior of that environ-
ment (e.g., a human limb) is known to reside within specific
limits. The dynamic properties of human arms, for instance,
vary considerably between subjects and with muscle activation,
but the variation is bounded. The apparent inertia at the hand
varies from that of a small child to that of a large adult, but
it is never zero and never exceeds a maximum (of several kg).
Stiffness is similarly bounded and, perhaps most importantly,
an arm can never exhibit certain challenging behaviors such as
total physical constraint or extreme static friction. A substantial
literature documents dynamic properties of human limbs (e.g.,
see [27] and [28]).
When passivity is used as a stability objective, the only as-
sumption made about the environment is that it, too, is passive.
This is likely sufficient to guarantee coupled stability with hu-
mans (though, to date, it has not been conclusively proven that
human limbs are passive; see [29] for an argument for treating
them as such). However, given the properties of human arms
described above, passivity is unnecessarily restrictive. Our ex-
perience has shown that some controllers that are known to be
nonpassive are adequately stable in clinical rehabilitation tasks
[26]. The better defined the conditions for stability, the less con-
servative controllers can be made, providing latitude to design
for better performance. We introduce a new way to define cou-
pled stability, and use it with the loop-shaping method to im-
prove performance.
A controlled robot should be complementary to the environ-
ments with which it is designed to interact; that is, it must in-
teract stably with these environments. A controller should pro-
vide for this while maximizing performance. We propose the
term complementary stability to describe the stability target for
interacting machines, where the details of stability are deter-
mined by the expected environment(s). Because the dynamics of
a particular human limb are almost impossible to know exactly
at a given time, an exact model cannot be used for human-in-
teractive robots. However, because all human arms are dynam-
ically similar, the environment can be represented in terms of a
nominal port function and some bounded deviation from
this nominal
(9)
defines the possible deviation from the nominal, and is
subject to a bound on its magnitude, e.g., in the infinity norm
(10)
is a weighting function that shapes the range of possible
deviation with frequency. Equation (9) defines a set of dynamic
behaviors that includes all expected environments. and
are chosen based on data or models. The additive pertur-
bation is presented as a representative example, but multiplica-
tive or feedback structures could also be used.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
BUERGER AND HOGAN: COMPLEMENTARY STABILITY AND LOOP SHAPING FOR IMPROVED HUMAN–ROBOT INTERACTION 239
Fig. 9. Block diagram of a robot interacting with an uncertain environment.
Fig. 10. Second-order environment model.
If the environment is defined by (9), the coupled system can
be represented by the block diagram in Fig. 9, which provides
the means to evaluate complementary stability for this system.
Definition: A robot with port impedance function sat-
isfies the complementary stability condition with a set of
environments defined by (9) if the model in Fig. 9 is ro-
bustly stable for any satisfying (10).
This definition translates coupled stability into a robust stability
problem, which can be solved by application of the small gain
theorem [30]. Robust stability is equivalent to stability of the
robot when coupled to all environments that it is expected to en-
counter; exactly the stability condition needed. If this condition
allows it, nonpassive controllers are permitted; this can improve
performance, as shown below.
Example 2: Using Limited Knowledge of Human Dynamics:
Example 1 is repeated with complementary stability replacing
passivity as the stability measure. The robot model remains as
in Fig. 6, and the control law (7) is used along with the perfor-
mance cost (6). This enables direct comparison of the passive
and nonpassive designs.
Complementary stability requires a representation of the en-
vironment. Here, a second-order model (shown in Fig. 10) is
chosen, capturing inertial , stiffness , and dissipative
characteristics, all of which are important parts of human
arm dynamics. Recent work suggests that actual arm endpoint
characteristics are close to second-order [27], [28], [31]. Each
parameter is defined by a nominal value and a
maximum deviation from that value , such that
(11)
is a real number between 1 and 1; when stability is
achieved for all values in this range, then it is guaranteed for all
permitted values of , and . The values of the parame-
ters in (11) were determined from the literature [27], [28], [31],
are given in the Appendix, and include behaviors ranging from
primarily inertial to primarily elastic and primarily dissipative,
as well as combinations of these behaviors. While parametric
Fig. 11. Block diagram of robot system interacting with perturbed environ-
ment. Expression for M is provided in the Appendix.
uncertainties are used here for their intuitive relationship to
physical quantities, the use of the small gain theorem permits a
wide range of alternative expressions of uncertainty, including
unmodeled dynamics and representations derived from exper-
imental data.
The environment model characterized by Fig. 10 and (11) is
most easily represented as an impedance with three perturbation
terms. Because the robot impedance is linear and nonzero, it can
be inverted and represented as an admittance. A block diagram
of the perturbed system is shown in the left panel of Fig. 11,
and is equivalent to the system shown in the right panel ( is
given in the Appendix). In the latter representation, the robust
stability of the system can be determined by the application of
the small gain theorem with the structured singular value [30].
In this case, the perturbation matrix is diagonal and real-valued;
the structured singular value for this case has no closed-form
solution and can be computationally burdensome, but it yields a
necessary and sufficient condition for coupled stability with all
environments in the set described by (11). For each combination
of controller values, the algorithm tests stability by computing
the appropriate structured singular value for over a set
of frequencies where the robot impedance is nonpassive (and
therefore coupled stability is at risk); when , contact with
some environment in the set drives the interface unstable, and
the controller is disallowed. For stable solutions, (6) is evaluated
to compare performance.
Fig. 12 shows the results of the loop-shaping algorithm using
complementary stability. This plot shows the cost (normalized
as in Fig. 7) with the maximum gain that meets the com-
plementary stability requirement for each combination of values
for and . As in Example 1, performance is best when low-fre-
quency lag compensation is used (marked in Fig. 12); the
normalized cost is 0.50 for the limiting plotted value (again, the
extreme case of PI control offers a small additional improve-
ment [24]). A lead controller at high frequencies (labeled in
Fig. 12) is almost as effective at lowering cost. The best per-
formance in this region has a normalized cost of 0.59, when
and 730 r/s. The design algorithm identifies two
distinct (and nonintuitive) control forms that each substantially
improve performance; both offer significant improvement over
passive control.
The impedance plots in Fig. 13 contrast the controllers.
The best proportional, lag, and lead controllers selected by
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
240 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 23, NO. 2, APRIL 2007
Fig. 12. Normalized cost at stability boundary versus pole and zero frequency.
Fig. 13. Port impedance magnitude and phase under no control, proportional,
lag, and lead control.
the method are shown along with the uncontrolled system
impedance.
All three controllers are nonpassive, as evidenced by the
phase exceeding in the frequency range of the structural
dynamic behavior (around 10 r/s), but they ensure coupled
stability specifically because knowledge of the environment has
been used for design. The magnitude plot shows that the lag
and lead controllers provide very different benefits compared
with proportional control: the former primarily boosts the gain
at low frequencies to offset friction, while the latter reduces
the impedance (inertia as well as friction) more equally at all
frequencies. The difference can be understood by considering
the phase plot. The lag compensator takes effect at low frequen-
cies, but the zero and gain are placed such that the phase stays
below until close to the structural resonance, where it then
tracks the phase of the system with proportional control. The
lead compensator creates a substantial dip in phase just below
resonance, reducing the destabilizing phase and permitting
Fig. 14. Examples of stable and unstable trajectories from impact tests.
a higher gain value across all frequencies. The nonintuitive
nature of this controller’s effect underscores the need for a
method like the one described here. The lag and lead controllers
are separated by almost two decades in frequency, and can be
combined into a lag-lead controller to reap the benefits of both
[24].
Compared with Example 1, the new stability measure reduces
the minimum cost from 0.72 to 0.50. Loop shaping improves
performance, and complementary stability parlays knowledge
of the environment into further performance gains. The latter
result is robust to realistic environmental uncertainty; an exact
model is not required to reap benefits. Though not demonstrated
here, this approach also provides a means of controller design
when the environment may be nonpassive.
V. IMPLEMENTATION AND COMPARISON WITH ALTERNATIVES
The controller from Example 2 was tested on the robot
module in Fig. 5 using a PC-based control system (QNX O/S,
1000 samples/s). Because of bandwidth limitations in the force
measurement, high-frequency lead compensation could not
be implemented as designed. A lag compensator with a break
frequency of 6 r/s (selected by the design method) was tested.
The coupled stability properties of the system were tested by
contact with springs, a hard plastic block, and human arms. Stiff
springs are usually the most destabilizing environment for sys-
tems that use force feedback [20]. A “contact test” and an “im-
pact test” were performed with six different springs with stiff-
ness ranging from 260 to 57 000 N/m, and with the plastic block,
with stiffness of approximately 10 N/m. In the contact test, the
robot handle was brought by hand into resting contact with the
spring and released. If oscillations grew, this test was judged un-
stable. The more challenging impact test required that the robot
fall a short distance (1–2 cm) to contact the environment and
withstand the impact. If oscillations abated and the system set-
tled to rest, this test was judged stable, while if oscillations grew,
it was judged unstable. Fig. 14 shows examples of stable and
unstable impact tests. Finally, each controller was tested by vig-
orous grasp with a human arm: a handle on the robot module
was gripped tightly and the arm and hand muscles co-contracted
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
BUERGER AND HOGAN: COMPLEMENTARY STABILITY AND LOOP SHAPING FOR IMPROVED HUMAN–ROBOT INTERACTION 241
TABLE I
COUPLED STABILITY PREDICTIONS AND TEST RESULTS, LAG CONTROL
Fig. 15. Virtual spring implemented with controller with no force feedback, lag
controller, and natural admittance controller. The direction of travel is shown by
the arrows on the uncompensated system curve.
maximally. The subject varied arm geometry and effort level to
test as wide a range of stiffness, damping, and inertia as possible.
If any vibration or oscillation could be induced, the controller
was marked as failing this test.
Table I shows composite results from coupled stability
testing, for the lag compensator with several different DC gain
parameter values. The columns marked with stiffness values
only show the maximum stable spring stiffness for each gain
level tested (separated by rows), as well as the maximum stable
stiffness predicted by the design model. The next two columns
show the results of testing with the plastic block and the human
arm; “ ” indicates a stable coupling and “ ” indicates insta-
bility. In the “block” column, the left mark is for the contact
test and the right for the impact test. The design set, which
includes only the lowest spring stiffness, is also highlighted.
The controller proves quite robustly stable under these test
conditions; in fact, only the highest gain level tested produced
any problem interacting with human arms. The system has
even better stability properties than predicted, enabling better
performance through a higher DC gain.
As predicted, the lag controller is particularly effective at
rejecting friction, thanks to its high gain at low frequencies.
This can be seen in Fig. 15, which shows the force versus
displacement curve for a virtual spring implemented on the
robot module. These curves were produced by slowly moving
the robot by hand against the controllers. The uncompensated
(dash-dot) curve shows the virtual stiffness implemented with
proportional position feedback alone, and thus reflects all
position-dependent friction intrinsic to the hardware. Coulomb
friction appears as the vertical segments of the curve, which
occur when starting, stopping, or when direction is reversed.
With the new compensator (dashed line), the low-frequency
behavior tracks the desired curve very closely. The Coulomb
friction is reduced from 10–20 N to less than 0.5 N, a reduction
of at least 95%. Inertia, tested by initial condition response
against a virtual spring of known stiffness, is just 1.2 kg when
, representing a reduction of approximately 80%
from the physical value (6 kg) and 60% from the theoretically
best passive controller (3 kg). This impedance reduction is
impressive in its own right, but even more so when considered
in light of the robust stability properties of this system. With
apparent friction reduced by 95% and inertia by 80%, the
system reliably remains stable despite a substantial impact with
the plastic block; a difficult task for any stiff robot, particularly
one using force feedback.
In all cases, the model is more conservative than the test; that
is, the model predicts instability for cases where the test system
remains stable. This may result from the fact that the system’s
Coulomb friction, potentially a large energy sink, is unmodeled.
This suggests that progress can in some cases be made using
simplified, linear models, even when robot behavior is signifi-
cantly nonlinear, and serves as an encouraging endorsement of
this approach. While an exact model may be preferred, a sim-
plified linear model permits the use of a vastly greater suite of
analytical tools and is often more realistically attainable on real
hardware.
The controller described above was compared with NAC, the
current “best practice” for interaction control [22]. The NAC
structure uses both motion and force feedback; target dynamic
properties are specified, the interaction force is measured, and
the motion feedback controller is used to servo the system to the
response specified by a target admittance. To design a NAC, the
module in Fig. 5 is modeled as a damped mass. The controller
uses both motion and endpoint force feedback
(12)
is the velocity of the mass, and and are again the actuator
and interaction force, respectively. and are controller
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
242 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 23, NO. 2, APRIL 2007
TABLE II
COUPLED STABILITY PREDICTIONS AND TEST RESULTS, NAC
transfer functions. To derive the controller, the port admittance
of the system, with (12) applied as the control law, is derived and
set equal to a desired admittance function with stiffness ,
damping , and mass
(13)
Proportional velocity feedback is used so that , and
the compensator for force feedback can be derived from (13).
For passivity, [22] recommends selecting at no less than
. While NAC was introduced as a means of providing
passivity, it can be used to make nonpassive controllers with
better performance if the target mass is further reduced [32].
NAC was implemented with a range of target parameters,
and stability and performance experiments were repeated. A
sample of the results is shown for 2 kg and variable
in Table II, which uses the same form as Table I. In gen-
eral, the stability properties of nonpassive controllers designed
with the NAC method were inferior to those that employed lag
force-feedback control. Only when the target inertia was
set at 6 kg (i.e., no reduction of apparent inertia) and the target
damping at 50 Ns/m was the NAC-controlled module as stable
in contacting all three types of environments (springs, block,
and arm) as the lag controller with . In this case,
however, the extremely high viscous friction and inertia make
performance far inferior. Complete results are in [24].
NAC is relatively effective in making the system exhibit
a linear dynamic response, because servoing along an actual
linear system trajectory is a specific objective. However, be-
cause velocity is fed back rather than position, it is subject to
accumulated errors in implementing desired stiffness, causing
a drift phenomenon. A hand-actuated force-position curve is
shown in Fig. 15 for comparison with the other controllers.
The lag controller’s use of low-frequency gain (approximating
integral action) makes endpoint behavior more noticeably
nonlinear than with NAC, but it effectively suppresses friction
nonetheless, and creates a very accurate virtual spring. Both
controllers have performance strengths, but in this case, the
lag controller proved to be more robust to interaction with the
target environment.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
Despite decades of effort, interaction control remains a chal-
lenging problem, and the design of interaction controllers lacks
the unified, effective approach enjoyed in servo design. We be-
lieve that this results, at least in part, from the underappreci-
ated structural differences between the two problems, and the
continued attempts to apply servo design techniques to inter-
acting systems. The approach described here seeks to bridge the
gap between the two control problems; the design “surfaces” of
Figs. 7 and 12 are the output of this method, and provide an
approximate equivalent to the insight available intuitively from
servo loop shaping. The examples show that, not surprisingly,
there are significant benefits to be gained from shaping the dy-
namics of feedback controllers, and also that greater benefits can
be achieved by relaxing passivity.
The examples presented here used a primitive optimization
technique. Advanced tools could almost certainly improve ef-
ficiency. Nevertheless, displaying the entire parameter space to
see trends (as in Figs. 7 and 12) rather than finding only one
best-performing solution provides valuable insight.
To date, the method has been applied to single-DOF systems,
where it has paid immediate dividends for actuator control. Ex-
tension to multiple-DOF robots would be useful; however, it is
importantnottounderstatethevalue ofthe single-DOF case.The
most significant limitation in the development of more advanced
interactive robots comes from the drive system; achieving both
high force density and low mechanical impedance is a persistent,
vexing problem [24]. Single-DOF control methods that can sig-
nificantly improve actuators will enable a significant technolog-
ical advance and facilitate increased implementation of interac-
tiverobots.Applicationtomulti-DOFrobotsrepresentsanimpor-
tant area for continued study. Although extension is nontrivial, at
least two different approaches show promise. One option is to
place force sensors on each actuator and design controllers with
an adapted version of the method presented here. The principal
challenge is that the “environment” with which each actuator in-
teracts could vary with robot configuration. For this reason, this
approach may be particularly fruitful for robots that typically op-
erate in only a small fraction of their total configuration space
(e.g., MIT-MANUS [1]), such that changes in dynamics with
configuration are minimal. A second approach would use end-
point force feedback and shape force compensation directly at
the robot level. This approach should be feasible, but will require
addressing several issues, including modeling the primary robot
resonances (which are likely to depend on configuration) and
definingperformanceatamulti-DOFinteractionport[33].Either
approachmightbenefitfromagain-schedulingcontrollerthatad-
justs the dynamics of force compensation with configuration.
APPENDIX
If the generic control law
(A-1)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
BUERGER AND HOGAN: COMPLEMENTARY STABILITY AND LOOP SHAPING FOR IMPROVED HUMAN–ROBOT INTERACTION 243
TABLE III
PARAMETER VALUES FOR ROBOT AND ENVIRONMENT MODELS
where , , and are controller transfer func-
tions, is applied to the model in Fig. 6, the impedance of the
system upstream of the force sensor dynamics is the fol-
lowing:
(A-2)
When the force transducer dynamics are included, the robot port
impedance becomes
(A-3)
The port impedance with a particular controller such as (7) can
be determined by substituting into these equations. If the envi-
ronment is as shown in Fig. 10 and described by (11), then the
expression for in Fig. 11 is
(A-4)
Parameter values for both examples are provided in Table III.
REFERENCES
[1] H. I. Krebs, N. Hogan, M. L. Aisen, and B. T. Volpe, “Robot-aided
neurorehabilitation,” IEEE Trans. Rehab. Eng., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 75–87,
Jan. 1998.
[2] S. D. Fasoli, H. I. Krebs, J. Stein, W. R. Frontera, and N. Hogan, “Ef-
fects of robotic therapy on motor impairment and recovery in chronic
stroke,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehab., vol. 84, pp. 477–482, 2003.
[3] R. B. Gillespie, “Haptic interface to virtual environments,” in Robotics
and Automation Handbook, T. Kurfess, Ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC,
2005.
[4] D. A. Lawrence, “Stability and transparency in bilateral teleoperation,”
IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 624–637, Oct. 1993.
[5] W. T. Townsend and J. A. Guertin, “Teleoperator slave—WAM design
methodology,” Ind. Robot., vol. 26, p. 167, 1999.
[6] M. Roberts, “A robot for gait rehabilitation,” SM thesis, Dept. Mech.
Eng., MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2004.
[7] J. Wheeler, “An ankle robot for a modular gait rehabilitation system,”
SM thesis, Dept. Mech. Eng., MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2004.
[8] J. S. Wilson, Ed., Sensor Technology Handbook. Boston, MA:
Newnes, 2005.
[9] G. E. Moore, “Cramming more components onto integrated circuits,”
Electronics, vol. 38, pp. 114–117, 1965.
[10] N. Hogan and S. P. Buerger, “Impedance and interaction control,” in
Robotics and Automation Handbook, T. Kurfess, Ed. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC, 2005.
[11] D. Whitney, “Force feedback control of manipulator fine motions,”
ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control, vol. 99, pp. 91–97, 1977.
[12] S. D. Eppinger and W. P. Seering, “Three dynamic problems in robot
force control,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 751–758,
Dec. 1992.
[13] R. Volpe and P. Khosla, “A theoretical and experimental investiga-
tion of explicit force control strategies for manipulators,” IEEE Trans.
Autom. Control, vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 1634–1650, Nov. 1993.
[14] J. T. Wen and S. Murphy, “Stability analysis of position and force con-
trol for robot arms,” IEEE Trans Autom. Control, vol. 36, no. 3, pp.
365–369, Mar. 1991.
[15] B. Siciliano and L. Villani, Robot Force Control. Norwell, MA:
Kluwer, 1999.
[16] H. P. Qian and J. DeSchutter, “Introducing active linear and nonlinear
damping to enable stable high gain force control in case of stiff
contact,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 1992, vol. 2, pp.
1374–1379.
[17] J. DeSchutter, H. Bruyninckx, W. Zhu, and M. W. Spong, “Force con-
trol: A bird’s eye view,” in Control Problems in Robotics and Automa-
tion: Future Directions. San Diego, CA: Springer-Verlag, 1997, pp.
1–17.
[18] N. Hogan, “Impedance control: An approach to manipulation,” ASME
J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control, vol. 107, pp. 1–24, 1985.
[19] ——, “On the stability of manipulators performing contact tasks,”
IEEE J. Robot. Autom., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 677–686, Dec. 1988.
[20] J. E. Colgate and N. Hogan, “Robust control of dynamically interacting
systems,” Int. J. Control, vol. 48, pp. 65–88, 1988.
[21] ——, “An analysis of contact instability in terms of passive physical
equivalents,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 1989, pp.
404–409.
[22] W. S. Newman, “Stability and performance limits of interaction con-
trollers,” ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control, vol. 114, pp. 563–570,
1992.
[23] G. F. Franklin, J. D. Powell, and A. Emami-Naeini, Feedback Control
of Dynamic Systems. New York: Addison-Wesley, 1994.
[24] S. P. Buerger, “Stable, high-force, low-impedance robotic actuators
for human-interactive machines,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Mech. Eng.,
MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2005.
[25] F. T. Brown, Engineering System Dynamics. New York: Marcel
Dekker, 2001.
[26] S. P. Buerger, H. I. Krebs, and N. Hogan, “Characterization and control
of a screw-driven robot for neurorehabilitation,” in Proc. IEEE CCA/
ISIC, 2001, pp. 388–394.
[27] J. M. Dolan, M. B. Friedman, and M. L. Nagurka, “Dynamic and loaded
impedance components in the maintenance of human arm posture,”
IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 698–709, May/Jun.
1993.
[28] T. Tsuji, P. G. Morasso, K. Goto, and K. Ito, “Human hand impedance
characteristics during maintained posture,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 72, pp.
475–485, 1995.
[29] N. Hogan, “Controlling impedance at the man/machine interface,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 1989, pp. 1626–1631.
[30] R. S. Sanchez-Pena and M. Sznaier, Robust Systems Theory and Ap-
plications. New York: Wiley, 1998.
[31] J. Palazzolo, “Robotic technology to aid and assess recovery and
learning in stroke patients,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Mech. Eng.,
MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2005.
[32] M. Dohring and W. S. Newman, “Admittance enhancement in force
feedback of dynamic systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
2002, pp. 638–643.
[33] E. D. Fasse and J. F. Broenink, “A spatial impedance controller for
robotic manipulation,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 13, no. 4, pp.
546–556, Aug. 1997.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
244 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 23, NO. 2, APRIL 2007
Stephen P. Buerger was born in Columbus, OH. He
received the Bachelor of Mechanical Engineering de-
gree from the University of Dayton, Dayton, OH, in
1999, and the S.M. and Ph.D. degrees in 2001 and
2005, respectively, from the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT), Cambridge.
Following a term as a Postdoctoral Associate
at the Newman Laboratory for Biomechanics and
Human Rehabilitation, MIT, he joined the Intelligent
Systems, Robotics and Cybernetics Group, Sandia
National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM, where he
is currently a Senior Member of the Technical Staff. His research interests
include human–machine interaction, actuator design, and the application of
these fields to robotics and medical technology.
Neville Hogan was born in Dublin, Ireland. He re-
ceived the Dip. Eng. (with distinction) from Dublin
College of Technology, Dublin, Ireland, and the M.S.,
M.E., and Ph.D. degrees from the Massachusetts In-
stitute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge.
Currently, he is a Professor of Mechanical Engi-
neering, Professor of Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
and Director of the Newman Laboratory for Biome-
chanics and Human Rehabilitation at MIT. Following
industrial experience in engineering design, he joined
MIT’s School of Engineering faculty in 1979 and has
served as Head and Associate Head of the Mechanical Engineering Depart-
ment’s System Dynamics and Control division.
Dr. Hogan’s awards include an Honorary Doctorate from the Delft University
of Technology; the Silver Medal of the Royal Academy of Medicine in Ireland;
and an Honorary Doctorate from the Dublin Institute of Technology.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
