=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
1404 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 41, 2025
Impedance Learning-Based Adaptive Force Tracking
for Robot on Unknown Terrains
Yanghong Li, Li Zheng , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Yahao Wang , Erbao Dong , Member, IEEE,
and Shiwu Zhang , Member, IEEE
Abstract—Aiming at the robust force tracking challenge for
robots in continuous contact with uncertain environments, a novel
adaptive variable impedance control policy based on deep rein-
forcement learning (DRL) is proposed in this article. The policy
includes a neural network feedforward controller and a variable
impedance feedback controller. Based on the DRL algorithm, the
iterative network feedforward controller explores and prelearns
the optimal policy for impedance tuning in simulation scenarios
with randomly generated terrain. The converged results are then
used as feedforward inputs in the variable impedance feedback
controller to improve the force-tracking performance of the robot
during contact. A simplified dynamic contact model between the
robot and the uncertain environment called the “couch model,”
which satisfies the Lipschiz continuity condition, is developed to
provide boundary conditions for the safe transfer of capabilities
learned in simulation to real robots. Unlike the exhaustive example
that relies on the completeness of the learning samples, this article
gives theoretical proofs of the stability and convergence of the
proposed control policy via Lyapunov’s theorem and contraction
mapping principle. The control method proposed in this article is
more interpretable and shows higher sample utilization efficiency
and generalization ability in simulations and experiments.
Index Terms—Compliance and impedance control, cooperating
robots, force tracking, model learning for control.
I. INTRODUCTION
WITH the development of emerging technologies,
such as collaborative robotic arms, dexterous hands,
quadrupedal robots, and wearable robotic exoskeletons, robots
are being increasingly applied to contact tasks in various
Received 6 September 2024; revised 18 December 2024; accepted 7 January
2025. Date of publication 15 January 2025; date of current version 13 February
2025. This work was supported in paty by the Science and Technology Innova-
tion Key Project of Anhui Province under Grant 202423h08050003, in part by
the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2018YFB1307400, and
in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities. This
article was recommended for publication by Associate Editor M. R. Dogar and
Editor J. Kober upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. (Corresponding
author: Erbao Dong.)
Yanghong Li, Li Zheng, Yahao Wang, and Erbao Dong are with the Hu-
manoid Robotics Institute, State Key Laboratory of Precision and Intelligent
Chemistry, CAS Key Laboratory of Mechanical Behavior and Design of Ma-
terials, Department of Precision Machinery and Precision Instrumentation,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China (e-mail:
ebdong@ustc.edu.cn).
Shiwu Zhang is with the Humanoid Robotics Institute, CAS Key Laboratory
of Mechanical Behavior and Design of Materials, Department of Precision
MachineryandPrecisionInstrumentation,UniversityofScienceandTechnology
of China, Hefei 230026, China.
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2025.3530345, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TRO.2025.3530345
environments [1], [2], [3], [4]. Complex tasks such as biarm
collaboration, flexible grasping, and human–robot interaction
also require contact force stabilization [5]. Unlike soft robots
based on material impedance, manipulators require a rigid
structure to ensure operational accuracy [6]. Especially facing
delicate tasks, such as machining and grinding, following the
reference trajectory while maintaining the desired force often
becomes a contradiction [7].
Asaclassicalforcecontrolframework,impedancecontroland
force–position hybrid control [8], [9], [10], [11] have achieved
good control results in structured environments. By correct
modeling of the robot and the environment, it is possible to
control the contact force quickly and stably. The introduction
of impedance control on industrial robots [10], [12], [13], [14],
[15] improves the success and efficiency of shaft-hole assembly
tasks. Force–position hybrid control helps promote stability in
grasping similar objects with dexterous hands [16]. However,
impedance control has many problems in the application of
robotsinteractingwithunstructuredenvironments. Foruncertain
environments, the unknown information about the environment,
such as stiffness and position, leads to frequent overloading
of joint actuators or damage of contact parts during physical
interaction[17],[18],[19].Ifitispossibletoremaincompliantor
adjust the impedance parameters in time during the interaction,
the contact force interacting with the object can be controlled,
thus avoiding the above-mentioned problems [20], [21], [22].
The core of force control in uncertain environments is the prob-
lem of impedance parameter adjustment. [23], [24], [25], [26].
The studies of force tracking problems in uncertain envi-
ronments are mainly categorized into three types [27], [28] as
follows.
1) Direct or indirect adjustment of the reference trajectory.
The core idea lies in estimating the stiffness and position
information of the environment based on the feedback
information, and thus adjusting the reference trajectory
or impedance gain. By extending the Kalman filter es-
timation to analyze the stiffness definition, the control
gain can come to realize force tracking [29]. Vision has
also been used to give a reference trajectory to assist
force tracking [30], [31]. Medina [32] accomplished a
contact task in an unstructured environment based on an
optimal feedback control method. Duan [25] proposed an
adaptivevariableimpedancecontrolmethodthatstabilizes
the system by adjusting the gain online based on the force
feedback information. A fuzzy logic-based impedance
1941-0468 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
LI et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING-BASED ADAPTIVE FORCE TRACKING FOR ROBOT ON UNKNOWN TERRAINS 1405
controller [33], [34] can realize the grinding and polishing
task. Although these methods have achieved good results
in the simulation of control systems, they are only effective
for surfaces with linear or nearly linear variations. This
is because the real environmental variations are often
nonlinear, which leads to force tracking errors that are
always present [35]. In addition, the estimation of the en-
vironmental information is subject to error, which further
affects the dynamic effect of force tracking [36].
2) Humanoid variable impedance regulation. Usually, the
robot model can be known accurately enough, but it is
difficult to obtain an accurate environment model [17],
[19]. The human central nervous system has been proven
to be able to effectively adjust its muscle impedance to
achieve stable interaction in a nonlinear dynamic envi-
ronment [37]. To imitate this impedance regulation in
humans, scholars have proposed many variable impedance
control methods [38]. Yang [39] realized force tracking
control without estimating the environmental stiffness
by processing electromyography signals collected from
human muscles to assist robot stiffness adjustment. Based
on human–robot interaction technology, Kronander [40]
enabled the robot to efficiently learn human impedance
adjustment ability. However, the process of humanoid
impedance learning often requires a high concentration
of the experimenter’s energy and a high workload with
low transfer efficiency. It is a method based on a priori ex-
perience, which is greatly influenced by human state [41].
3) Reinforcement learning (RL)-based control methods. RL
is an important area of artificial intelligence, which is
based on the principle of finding the optimal policy for
a given cost. Especially with the development of deep
reinforcement learning (DRL), it has been widely applied
to robot control problems, such as wearable exoskele-
tons [4], [42], bipedal robot walking [43], and dexterous
hand grasping [44]. Li and Buchli [42], [45] combined
reinforcement learning with impedance control to adjust
the impedance gain parameters based on stochastic op-
timal theory, which realizes tradeoffs between system
accuracy, energy consumption and impedance, but the
learning results lacked interpretability. Although RL has
been effectively applied to solve a variety of problems,
it has rarely been used to deal with force tracking. This
is because the process of learning variable impedance
control requires a lot of physical interaction with the
environment, which may be a security issue. Worse still,
the results of learning are often uncertain, i.e., there is
no guarantee of convergence of the learning process and
overfitting often occurs.
In summary, the first category of methods is based on clas-
sical adaptive adjustment mechanisms and always suffers from
force-tracking errors when facing higher order nonlinear dy-
namical systems [10], [19]. The second category of methods is
heavyworkload,lowefficiency,andcannottargetforce-sensitive
tasks [19], [37]. The third category incorporating DRL is robust
to nonlinear changes in the system but needs to address the
safe interaction problem and interpretability analysis of the
controller [18], [19], [40].
Considering the problems of the above-mentioned studies,
this article proposes an adaptive impedance learning method
to realize the force-tracking task in complex dynamic environ-
ments. It combines the idea of RL and the advantages of variable
impedance control and is divided into an impedance learning
part and a variable impedance control part. The tuning policy
of impedance parameters in the variable impedance controller
will be given by the deep reinforcement learner. In the virtual
environment of randomly generated surfaces, actor–critic DRL
is used to find the optimal policy for impedance adjustment.
The actor network adjusts the impedance parameters based
on the value function; the critic network fits the relationship
between the impedance state and the cost function. Based on
the data of the digital twin robot interacting with the virtual
environment, the network parameters are updated to minimize
the cost function (i.e., force error) by backpropagation. The
converged impedance learning results are mapped onto the same
real robot to achieve a safe transfer of learning outcomes.
The main contributions of this article are as follows.
1) Regarding the force tracking problem under uncertain
environments, a RL control policy with interpretability is
proposed by combining DRL feedforward and variable
impedance feedback, and its stability and convergence
analysis are given.
2) Considering the dynamic changes in the equilibrium posi-
tion of the environment, a simplified contact model of the
robot’s end-effector with the unstructured environment,
called the “couch model,” is developed. By satisfying the
Lipschiz continuity condition, boundary conditions are set
for the safe transfer of impedance learning results from
simulation to real terrain.
3) Byincludingtheobservablestatequantitiesofthedynamic
system in the regression vector of the neural network, the
overfitting phenomenon caused by other network control
policies that rely only on inputs and outputs in uncertain
systems is avoided. Simulations in different terrains and
real robot experiments validate our method.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
establishes an equivalent model of the dynamic force track-
ing problem in an unknown environment, and introduces the
proposed adaptive impedance learning method. Section III an-
alyzes the stability and convergence of the proposed control
algorithm. Sections IV and V carry out a series of simulations
and experiments to verify the feasibility, and the control effect
is compared with other variable impedance control methods.
The advantages of this study over other neural network-based
methods are discussed. Finally, Section VI concludes this article.
II. METHODOLOGY
In this study, the main focus is on the force tracking problem
during robot contact with the environment with unknown stiff-
ness and terrain information, aiming to determine the optimal
impedance parameter adjustment policy. We first model the
interaction between a general unstructured environment and a
robot. The force tracking problem is then transformed into a
problem of finding the optimal policy for Bellman’s equation.
The intelligent agent is trained to learn to autonomously adjust
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
1406 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 41, 2025
TABLE I
NOTATION IN THIS ARTICLE
theimpedanceparameterstoadapttochangesintheenvironment
location. The notations used in this section and the rest sections
are shown in Table I.
A. System Modeling and Variable Impedance Control
Consider the workspace vector x ∈ Rm
of a manipulator in a
singularity-free region. To describe the change of contact force
from unconstrained to dynamically constrained, the robot is
presented by a second-order mass–damping–spring model
M(ẍm − ẍr) + B(ẋm − ẋr) + K(xm − xr) = fm − fd (1)
whereM ∈ Rm×m
,B ∈ Rm×m
,andK ∈ Rm×m
denotethein-
ertia gain matrix, damping gain matrix, and stiffness gain matrix
in the time-varying impedance model, respectively. xm ∈ Rm
and xr ∈ Rm
are the measured position trajectory and reference
position trajectory of the end-effector in Cartesian workspace,
respectively. fm ∈ Rm
and fd ∈ Rm
are the measured and de-
sired contact forces between the robot end and the environment,
respectively. Let the force tracking error Δf = fm − fd.
The environment is modeled as a position-varying stiffness
model to describe the dynamic changes in the environment
Kenv(xm − xenv) = fenv (2)
where Kenv, xenv denote the stiffness and rest position of the
environment, respectively.
The force tracking process can be formulated as three phases,
as shown in Fig. 1. The first phase is unconstrained free space
(0 − t1) where the robot is approaching the environment. The
second phase is the beginning of the contact between the robot
and the environment, which is usually a rapid collision to a
Fig. 1. Couch model for robot contact with dynamic nonlinear environments.
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of robot–environment contact force in different
phases.
stabilization process (t1 − t2). The third phase represents the
process in which the environment dynamically changes and the
robot tracks the changes and restabilizes (t2 − t3).
As shown in Fig. 2, in most situations, the environmental
dynamic changes in the third phase are often unavoidable and
nonlinear. Biomechanical studies have shown that human be-
ings, after years of empirical learning, have a well-developed
ability to regulate variable impedance [37]. Humans can adapt
to nonlinear dynamic changes in the environment by adjusting
the stiffness and damping of their skeletal muscles. This is
essentially an adaptive variable impedance control based on
neural networks. We expect the robot to learn this ability of
impedance adjustment and adjust the impedance parameters
in real time to track the desired force. To avoid unwanted
oscillations, the parameters to be tuned by the controller are
B(t) and K(t), which are the row vectors corresponding to the
impedance matrix of (1) in the task space.
At each stage of force tracking, the reference trajectory xr
and the impedance parameters [stiffness B(t), damping K(t)]
are provided to the variable impedance controller
I(t) = [K(t), B(t), xr(t)]T
(3)
where t ∈ {0, 1, . . ., N − 1} is a discrete-time series and posi-
tive integer N < ∞.
Thecontrolleroutputstheend-effectortrajectorycontrolcom-
mand α(I), and α depends on the impedance parameter I(t).
A nonredundant manipulator with n(≥ m) joints moving in a
singularity-free region of the workspace is chosen to execute the
control command. According to the inverse dynamics compen-
sation, the joint torque τ ∈ Rn
can be written as
τ = JT
(q)α + Ff q̇ + ĝ(q) (4)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
LI et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING-BASED ADAPTIVE FORCE TRACKING FOR ROBOT ON UNKNOWN TERRAINS 1407
where q ∈ Rn
denotes the vector of current joint variables,
J(q) ∈ Rn×m
is the end-effector geometric Jacobian matrix, Ff
is a positive-definite (diagonal) matrix of viscous friction coef-
ficients at the joints and the term ĝ(q) is needed to compensate
for the static torques due to gravity.
The state change of the environment causes the force er-
ror. The designed RL feedforward controller will adjust the
impedance parameters as the actions
ΔI(t) = [ΔK, ΔB, Δxr]T
(5)
to generate the feedforward control signal uf
.
The updated impedance parameters will be applied to the
robot via (4) to generate new joint torques.
I(t + 1) = I(t) + ΔI(t). (6)
B. Tracking Problem Formulation
The considered model of robot–environment dynamic inter-
action is confronted with a more generalized terrain. Dynamic
changes in the equilibrium position of the environment make
explicit expressions for the contact forces unavailable or difficult
to handle. Therefore, we model the interaction process as a
Markov decision process in a finite state, described by the
following general form of nonlinear state–space discrete-time
systems, which was also studied in [42] and [47]:
sp(t + 1) = h (sp(t), up(t))
yp(t) = KCsp(t) (7)
where t is the discrete-time index defined in (3), p ∈ N+ rep-
resents the trial, up(t) ∈ Rm
, sp(t) = [xm, xenv]T
, and yp(t) ∈
Rm
are inputs, states, and outputs of the system at the pth trial,
h(·, ·) represents the dynamic system consisting of the robot and
the environment and is a nonlinear function, xenv will be random
to characterize the uncertain environmental variations, and KC
is the matrix with appropriate dimensions.
Considering the realistic constraints and the existence of
solutions, let the system (7) studied in this article satisfy the
following properties and assumptions [47], [48].
Property 1: h(·, ·) is globally Lipschiz continuous on sp(t)
and up(t). That is, for any t ∈ {0, . . ., N − 1}, there exists a
positive constant l satisfying
h (s1(t), u1(t)) − h (s2(t), u2(t))
≤ l (s1(t) − s2(t) + u1(t) − u2(t)) (8)
where l = max{hu(t), hs(t)}.
Property 2: For any realizable desired force yr(t) and given
reference state sr(t) = [xr, xenv]T
, there exists a unique u∗
(t)
that satisfies the following state–space equation:
sr(t + 1) = h (sr(t), u∗
(t))
yr(t) = KCsr(t) (9)
which means that the desired force uniquely determines the
reference trajectory based on the environment’s stationary state
and stiffness coefficient.
Then, the tracking error can be rewritten as
e(t) = yp(t) − yr(t) = Δf (10)
with Δf defined in (1). The detailed proof of the existence and
uniqueness of Property 2 is given in the literature [48].
Assumption 1: To simplify the analysis, we assume the same
initial state for all trials. i.e.,
∀sp(0) = sr(0). (11)
The tracking problem is equivalent to learning the optimal
impedance tuning policy from the observed data.
C. DRL for Impedance Learning
Fig. 3 depicts the proposed DRL-based variable impedance
control solution. The deep neural network controller is pre-
trained in a randomly generated virtual environment. The trained
network is used to correct the impedance parameters in real time
during the control process. The control signal consists of two
parts
u(t) = uf
(t) + ub
(t) (12)
where uf
(t) is the feedforward control input and ub
(t) is the
feedback control input. ub
(t) is determined by the current feed-
back e(t), in this case ub
(t) ∝ e(t). The core of this article is
uf
(t).
1) DRL controller: The neural network controller contains
an actor and an estimator. For the pth trial, the actor employs an
multilayer perception (MLP) structure to output the feedforward
signal
uf
p (t) = g (νp−1(t)) (13)
where νp−1(t) is the regression vector containing the signals
recorded during the previous trial. νp−1(t) is composed of two
components
νp−1(t) = [up−1(t), xp−1(t)]T
. (14)
Remark 1: Notably, the observed force errors come from two
sources: the position error of the end-effector to the environment
and the position error due to the environment change. Dynamic
changes in the environment often bring about changes in other
orthogonal force information. Therefore, instead of other itera-
tive neural network controllers [46], [47] (which treat the system
as a black box and train the network only with the inputs and
outputs of the system), we train the network with the input u
and the robot state x of the system, which reduces the loss of
state information. On the other hand, this makes the feedback
controller necessary since it contains information about the
output of the system. We will further explain the reasons later
in the study.
Our MLP network for iterative impedance learning uses the
following structure:
uf
p (t) = Wφ
2,pφ

Wν
1,pνp−1(t) + Wb
1,p

+ Wb
2,p (15)
whereWν
1,p = [Wu
1,p, Wx
1,p],Wb
1,p aretheadaptiveweightmatri-
ces connecting the input, states, and bias between the input layer
and the hidden layer, Wφ
2,p, Wb
2,p are the adaptive weight weights
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
1408 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 41, 2025
Fig. 3. Overview of the simulation, training, and control method.
and bias matrices between the hidden layer and the output layer,
φ(·) is the nonlinear activation function and hyperbolic tangent
is chosen in this article.
Although (15) has only one hidden layer, it can represent any
nonlinear continuous function with assumed accuracy. Impor-
tantly, the proposed approach makes it possible to use more
complex models.
The estimator in the DRL controller is designed to evaluate
the performance of the actor. For a time series t within the pth
trial, define the observations
op(t) = [xp(t), ep(t)]T
(16)
and the immediate reward function
rp(t) = rconst − eT
p (t)Reep(t) (17)
whererconst(> 0)isthepositivereward,Re isadiagonalmatrix.
The total discounted reward or the Q-function (γ < 1) is chosen
as
Q (op(t), up(t)) = E
⎡
⎣rp(t) +
N−t−1

j=1
γj
rp(t + j)
⎤
⎦ (18)
and the Q-function satisfies the Bellman equation
Q (op(t), up(t)) = rp(t) + γQ (op(t + 1), up(t + 1)) . (19)
2) Control training: The dynamic changes in the environ-
ment resulted in different instantaneous output errors. For better
evaluation of the control performance, the total expected cost Jp
over the whole discrete time is used as the evaluation criterion,
and the total expected cost is
Jcost(θp) =
N−1

t=0
E [Q(t) + βH (up(t))] (20)
where θp = [W1,p, W2,p]T
is the generalized network parameter
vector, β > 0 is the temperature coefficient, and H(·) is the
entropy of the neural network controller output. Maximizing
the entropy of the policy to better explore the impedance tuning
policy. The goal of training is to find the corresponding optimal
parameters θ∗
that maximize Jcost
θ∗
= arg max
θ
Jcost(θp). (21)
Then, according to the chain rule, the gradient of the expected
cost concerning the controller hyperparameters θp is computed
as
Δθp = −η
∂Jcost
∂θp
(22)
where η is the learning rate.
Afterseveraliterations,thenetworkparametersθp areupdated
by backpropagation. A gradient-based policy search is applied
to progressively approximate the optimal control parameters θ∗
.
III. CONTROL SYSTEM ANALYSIS
In this section, we qualitatively analyze the stability of the
control system and the convergence of the DRL controller.
A. Preliminaries
In order to satisfy Assumption 1 that the initial state starts
in the reference state, this requires that the initial state must
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
LI et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING-BASED ADAPTIVE FORCE TRACKING FOR ROBOT ON UNKNOWN TERRAINS 1409
be stable. Different initial impedance parameters will affect the
effectiveness of the control. For this reason, we use spectral
analysis to select the initial impedance parameters that satisfy
the stabilization condition, at which point the DRL controller
does not update the impedance parameters of the system. In
the workspace, the reference trajectory error ΔXr can be trans-
formed into the frequency domain [25]
MΔX(z)z2
+ BΔX(z)z + KΔX(z) = ΔF(z) (23)
where z is the complex variable and the corresponding variables
are capitalized to indicate the result of the transformation in the
frequency domain.
The dynamics between the force tracking error ΔF and
the positional perturbation ΔX is described by a second-order
system with transfer function G(z) = [Mz2
+ Bz + K]−1
. The
control system adjusts the robot impedance parameters to gen-
erate the position correction ΔXr. ΔXr modifies the reference
trajectory to output the control command Xd = Xr + ΔXr =
Xr + ΔF · G(z). In position servocontrol mode, then Xm = Xd
holds.
Fenv is measured by the force sensor, i.e., Fm = Fenv. From
(2), the force tracking error can be rewritten as
ΔF(z) = Fm − Fd = Kenv(Xd − Xenv) − Fd
= Kenv (Xr + G(z)ΔF(z) − Xenv) − Fd. (24)
Substituting G(z) = [Mz2
+ Bz + K]−1
into (24), it is or-
ganized as
ΔF(z) =
(Mz2
+ Bz + K)[Kenv(Xr − Xenv) − Fd]
Mz2 + Bz + K − Kenv
. (25)
Then from (25), the steady-state force tracking error is ob-
tained as follows:
Δfss = lim
z→0
ΔF(z) =
K · [Kenv(Xr − Xenv) − Fd]
K − Kenv
. (26)
For the force tracking steady-state error to be zero, the ref-
erence position should satisfy Kenv(Xr − Xenv) − Fd = 0 or
K = 0. However, xenv and Kenv of the environment considered
in this article are not known in advance. Any change in the en-
vironment information will bring about corresponding changes
in the steady-state error. And if setting the stiffness parameter
to zero, we have Δfss = 0 as an equilibrium state.
The same is true for the other dimensions due to the or-
thogonality and independence of the Cartesian variables in
the workspace. Therefore, K = 0n×n will be exploited in the
subsequent system analysis.
B. Lyapunov Stability Analysis
Considering the manipulator in (4), the counterpart of the
dynamic model can be described as
D(q)q̈ + C(q, q̇)q̇ + g(q) + τf (q̇) = τ − JT
fm (27)
where D(q) ∈ Rn×n
is the inertia matrix, C(q, q̇) ∈ Rn×n
is
the nonlinear term matrix of Coriolis and centrifugal forces,
g(q) ∈ Rn
is the gravity vector, τf ∈ Rn
is the torque due to
joint friction, τ ∈ Rn
is the driving torque, and the external
force fm ∈ Rm
is measured by the force sensor. Usually, the
robot’s gravity term can be obtained with sufficient accuracy,
i.e., ĝ(q) = g(q).
Then, some useful properties of the dynamic model (27) for
analyzing stability are presented in the following [6].
Property3: D(q)in(27)issymmetricandpositive-definite.If
dmin(dmax) denotes its minimum (maximum) eigenvalue, then
it is
0 < dminI ≤ D(q) ≤ dmaxI (28)
with dmax < ∞.
Property 4: The matrix N(q, q̇) = Ḋ(q, q̇) − 2C(q, q̇) is
skew-symmetric, i.e., for all ξ ∈ Rn
, the following equation
holds:
ξT
N(q, q̇)ξ = 0. (29)
Theorem 1: Consider the system (7) with property 2 and the
controlled object (27) with Properties 3–4. The initial damping
matrix B(0) is chosen as a positive-definite matrix, then Δfss →
0 is asymptotically stable if
λmin {ΔB(t)} ≥ 0, ∀t ∈ {0, . . ., N − 1} (30)
where ΔB(t) is the action defined in (5) and λmin{·} denotes
the minimum eigenvalue of a matrix.
Proof: As a simplified dynamic tracking process, only vis-
cous friction is considered, i.e., τf (q̇) = Ff q̇. Plugging (4) in
(27) gives
D(q)q̈ + C(q, q̇)q̇ + JT
fm = JT
α. (31)
Let ėq = q̇ − q̇r and ex = xm − xenv denote the configura-
tion space velocity error and task space position error, respec-
tively, where q̇r is the reference angular velocity vector. Property
2 ensures the unique existence of the optimal reference trajectory
xr and leads to ẋr = Jq̇r = ẋenv.
Consider the Lyapunov function candidate as follows:
V =
1
2
ėT
q D(q)ėq +
1
2
eT
x Kenvex. (32)
Since Kenv is positive-definite and property 3, we have
V ≥
1
2
dmin ėq +
1
2
λmin {Kenv} ex > 0. (33)
Based on the preliminary analysis, choosing
α = J−T
(Dq̈r + Cq̇r) − B(t)ėx (34)
where B(t) = ΔB(t − 1) + B(t − 1) is the variable
impedance parameter in the controller α.
In deriving (34), the inverse of the Jacobian matrix can be
computed directly for a nonredundant manipulator (n = m)
moving in a singularity-free region of the workspace, whereas
the pseudoinverse can be used in the redundant case (n > m) in
conjunction with a suitable term in the null space of the Jacobian
matrix describing the internal motion of the manipulator [6].
Folding (34) into (31) gives
Dëq = −Cėq − JT
(fm + B(t)ėx) . (35)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
1410 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 41, 2025
Computing the time derivative of (32) and substituting (35)
into it. From (2) and Property 4, we have
V̇ =
1
2
ėT
q Ḋėq + ėT
q Dëq + ėT
x Kenvex
= ėT
q
1
2
Ḋ − C ėq + ėT
x (Kenvex − fm − B(t)ėx)
= −ėT
x B(t)ėx. (36)
Thanks to the positive definiteness of the initial damp-
ing matrix B(0), we have B(1) = ΔB(0) + B(0) >
max{ ΔB(0) , B(0) } > 0, i.e., B(1) is also positive-definite.
Following mathematical induction, it can be concluded that
maintaining ΔB(t) semipositive-definite yields a positive-
definite B(t), which implies a negative definite V̇. Combining
(33) and using the Lyapunov stability criterion, we get that the
system is asymptotically stable and it will always return to force
equilibrium state. Thus fm → fd is asymptotically stable, i.e.,
Δfss → 0 is asymptotically stable. This sets the constraints for
impedance learning and thus ensures the stability of the DRL
variable impedance control system.
C. DRL Controller Convergence Analysis
Althoughwediscussedcontrolsystemstabilityintheprevious
section, it is expected that the DRL controller can explore the
optimal state trajectory to the equilibrium state after impedance
learning, i.e., converge to the optimal controller. This article
focuses on two convergence properties.
Property 5: Input optimality
lim
p→∞
up(t) = u∗
(t). (37)
Property 6: Tracking zero error property
lim
p→∞
ep(t) = 0, ∀t ∈ {0, . . ., N − 1} . (38)
Before starting the convergence analysis of impedance learn-
ing, we introduce the following definition.
Definition 1: [49]: Assuming a set of random vectors v(t)
concerning t ∈ {0, . . ., N − 1}, define the λ-norm of v(t) as
v(t)λ = sup
t
a−tλ
E v(t) (39)
with a > 1 and a finite constant λ > 0, where E ·  denotes the
Euclidean norm of the mathematical expectation of a random
vector.
Now, we can give sufficient conditions for the convergence of
our DRL control system.
Theorem 2: Consider the system (7) with Properties 1–2 and
Assumption 1 holds, then the DRL feedforward controller (13)
with regressor (14) satisfies convergence property 5 if
sup
t
gu(t) < 1 (40)
where
gu(t) =
∂g (up(t), xp(t))
∂up(t)
, gx(t) =
∂g (up(t), xp(t))
∂xp(t)
(41)
denote the partial derivatives of the DRL controller concerning
the input error and the tracking error, respectively.
Proof: For the system (7) with Property 2 holding, the error
of the pth iteration result relative to (9) is given by
Δsp(t + 1) = h (sp(t), up(t)) − h (sr(t), u∗
(t))
Δyp(t) = KcΔsp(t) (42)
where state error Δsp = sp − sr = [xm − xr, 0]T
=
[Δxp, 0]T
and Δyp = ep defined in (10).
Let Δup = up − u∗
, on the assumption of Property 1, taking
the Euclidean norm for both sides of the state–space (42) is given
Δxp(t + 1) = Δsp(t + 1)
≤ l (Δsp(t) + Δup(t)) . (43)
From the same initial state of Assumption 1, it follows that
Δsp(0) = 0. Noticing the recursive nature of (43) yields
Δxp(t) ≤
t−1

i=0
lt−i
Δup(i) . (44)
Since the feedback control signal ub
(t) is not updated dur-
ing impedance learning, Δup(t) = Δuf
p (t). Applying Taylor’s
formula to the DRL controller (13) with regression vector (14)
and taking the mathematical expectation of the Euclidean norm,
yields
E Δup+1(t) ≤ E guΔup(t) + E gxΔxp(t) . (45)
In view of (44), the inequality (45) can be rewritten as
E Δup+1(t) ≤ gu E Δup(t)
+ gx
t−1

i=0
lt−i
E Δup(i) . (46)
Applying the λ-norm to (46), i.e., multiplying both sides of
the inequality by the same a−kλ
and then taking the upper bound,
gives
Δup+1(t)λ ≤ sup
t
gu · Δup(t)λ
+ sup
t
gx · sup
t
a−tλ
t−1

i=0
lt−i
E Δup(i) . (47)
Let a > max{1, l}, then the last term in (47) can be simplified
as
sup
t
a−tλ
t−1

i=0
lt−i
E Δup(i)
≤ sup
t
t−1

i=0
a−(λ−1)(t−i)
sup
t

a−λi
E Δup(i)

≤
1 − a−(λ−1)N
aλ−1 − 1
Δup(t)λ . (48)
Substituting (48) into (46) yields
Δup+1(t)λ ≤ ρu + ρx
1 − a−(λ−1)N
aλ−1 − 1
Δup(t)λ (49)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
LI et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING-BASED ADAPTIVE FORCE TRACKING FOR ROBOT ON UNKNOWN TERRAINS 1411
where
ρu = sup
t
gu(t) , ρx = sup
t
gx(t) . (50)
If (40) holds, i.e., ρu < 1, then there always exists a suffi-
ciently large λ such that ρx
1−a−(λ−1)N
aλ−1−1 < 1 − ρu, which further
gives
Δup+1(t)λ ≤ ρ Δup(t)λ (51)
holds, where
ρ = ρu + ρx
1 − a−(λ−1)N
aλ−1 − 1
< 1. (52)
Thus, from the contracting mapping principle it follows that:
lim
p→∞
Δup(t)λ = 0, ∀t ∈ {0, . . ., N − 1} . (53)
Noticing Δup(t) ≥ 0 and the finiteness of t, it can be
concluded that
lim
p→∞
Δup(t) = 0, ∀t ∈ {0, . . ., N − 1} (54)
which implies limp→∞ up(t) = u∗
(t) holds for all ∀t ∈
{0, . . ., N − 1} and thus input optimality, i.e., Property 5 is
satisfied.
Remark 2: [47]: Based on the above-mentioned analysis, to
guarantee the convergence of impedance learning, the MLP
networkin(15)oftheDRLfeedforwardcontrollersoastosatisfy
sup
t
gu(t) = sup
t






Wφ
2,p
T
◦ φ
T
Wu
1,p





< 1 (55)
where φ = ∂φ
∂u ∈ Rh×m
is the activation function derivative and
◦ is the elementwise product.
Thanks to the chosen hyperbolic tangent activation function,
the range of φ is restricted to (0, 1). Thus, the convergence
condition (55) of the DRL controller can be simplified as
sup
t


W
φ
2,pWu
1,p


 < 1. (56)
We adopt weight normalization [50] and set a reasonable
initial weight matrix to satisfy (56), thus guaranteeing the
convergence of the output of the DRL controller during the
impedance learning process. This provides a theoretical basis
for the convergence of impedance learning, which is no longer
an unknown black box.
Corollary 1: Given the nonlinear system (7) with the DRL
feedforward controller (13) satisfying theorem 2, it tracks zero
error at convergence (Property 6).
Proof: Apply the λ-norm to (44) and let a > max{1, L}, the
derivation along (48) readily yields
0 ≤ Δsp(t)λ ≤
1 − a−(λ−1)N
aλ−1 − 1
Δup(t)λ . (57)
From(53),∀ε > 0,theλ-normoftheinputerrorforthesystem
that satisfies Theorem 2 is less than ε when p is sufficiently large.
Thus, by the squeeze theorem, it follows that:
lim
p→∞
Δsp(t)λ = 0, ∀t ∈ {0, . . ., N − 1} . (58)
Fig.4. CoppeliaSim modelin differentphases. (a) Random terrain. (b) Contact
interaction. (c) Feedforward correction. (d) Soft update networks.
Similarly, since Δsp(t) ≥ 0 and t is finite, it implies that
lim
p→∞
Δsp(t) = 0, ∀t ∈ {0, . . ., N − 1} . (59)
Folding (59) into (42), it is easy to obtain that
lim
p→∞
ep(t) = lim
p→∞
Δyp(t) = 0, ∀t ∈ {0, . . ., N − 1}
(60)
which implies that limp→∞ ep(t) = 0 for all t = 0, . . ., N − 1,
i.e., Property 6 holds. The proof is thus completed.
IV. COPPELIASIM SIMULATION STUDIES
In order to verify the proposed control scheme and analysis,
a series of simulation studies are conducted and presented in
this section. First, the learning procedure for impedance tuning
is designed and the stopping criterion is set. Then simulations
are performed to test the effectiveness of the proposed control
scheme and verify the convergence analysis, which covers most
of the actual force-tracking scenarios.
A. CoppeliaSim Model Setup
We studied the force-tracking control problem using Cop-
peliaSim, a well-established simulator in the field of robotics.
The robot–environment interaction model, as shown in Fig. 4,
consists of a manipulator arm with a fixed base and different
terrains generated with random polynomial parameters. In this
article, the digital twin model of Universal Robots UR5 is
adopted to illustrate the implementation. The model settings,
such as kinematics and dynamics parameters, are modeled with
reference to the real robot and precompensated for tool end force
errors. The position and stiffness parameters of the environment
are unknown, but the initial position of the environment, i.e., the
initial state, is constant. In this study, the impedance parameters
of the robot are tuned by the DRL feedforward controller for
each sampling time t ∈ {0, . . ., N − 1}. The weight parameters
of the neural network model are updated for each training cycle
p ∈ R. The updated DRL feedforward controller replaces the
target neural controller for the current training cycle and opens
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
1412 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 41, 2025
Algorithm 1: Impedance Learning for Force Tracking.
Input: Target output yr, tolerance error εe
Output: Optimal weights (within tolerance) θ∗
1: Initialization: Iteration index p ← 0; Initialize the
normalized weight network θ0 by (56), impedance
parameters I(0) and state-action value Q(0); Batch
index ibat
2: repeat
3: Set Initial States: Time index t ← 0; Initial States
sp(0) ← sr(0); Generate xenv with random
polynomial interpolation
4: repeat
5: Take Action: Generate feedforward input uf
p (t) by
(15); Compute impedance parameters I(t) by (6);
Obtain reward rp and observations op(t), op(t + 1)
6: Evaluate: Add input up(t), observations op(t),
op(t + 1) and reward rp(t) to the replay buffer;
Compute Q function error by (19) and cost Jcost(θp)
by (20)
7: t ← t + 1
8: until t > N
9: if Buffer size Np ≥ ibatN then
10: Update Controller: Update network weights θp by
(21) and (22)
11: yp ← 1
Np

t yp(t)
12: p ← p + 1
13: end if
14: until yp − yr < εe
15: return θ∗
← θp
the next round of impedance learning training. The updating
rules are based on the principle of gradient descent besides
satisfying Theorems 1 and 2, and Corollary 1.
In addition, artificial Gaussian noise is added to state s in
CoppeliaSim to simulate sensor noise, with the sensor noise
variance set to 30% of the performance tolerance bound. The
state s is defined in (16). We also added collision calculations
during model contact interactions, which is a consideration to
make the simulation more realistic.
B. Simulation Procedure
Algorithm 1 summarizes how our proposed DRL variable
impedance controller implements impedance parameter tuning
and network updating. In order to normalize the data types,
Algorithm 1 normalizes the state parameter s and maps the
action parameter ΔI within the action bounds [−1, 1] by the
common logarithmic relation. Set the reward decay coefficient
γ = 0.99 and the learning rate η = 0.001. The built-in actor–
critic network is updated at each training cycle until the train-
ing is successful. The simulation study consists of two main
parts: training and pretests. 1) Training: The DRL variable
impedance controller is applied to explore the optimal policy
for tuning the impedance parameters, i.e., impedance learning,
in a randomly generated terrain scene. The maximum number of
training sessions is set to be 900, the maximum sampling batch
is 350, and the sampling interval is 0.05 s. Provide that when
the average force error for ten consecutive complete samples is
less than 3% of the desired force and the overshoots σ% are all
less than 75%, the training is done. That is, the current DRL
variable impedance controller is considered to have converged
to the optimal impedance controller within the tolerance error
εe. The upper limit of overshooting is set to avoid unacceptable
overshooting behavior of the agent. 2) Pretests: The tests are
mainly employed to illustrate the effectiveness, convergence and
robustness of the proposed control method. First, three typical
surface terrains are selected to test the force-tracking effect of
the DRL variable impedance controller and compared with other
control methods to illustrate the effectiveness and advantages.
Then, the tracking force error of the controller at different
training stages is tested to verify the convergence. Finally, we
test for terrain not present in the training dataset to illustrate the
robustness of the controller.
C. Simulation Results
1) Force tracking tests: In order to evaluate the control
effect of the proposed method, we tested the trained DRL
variable impedance control on different terrains for force
tracking. We selected three typical terrain scenarios: planes
(ẋenv = 0, ẍenv = 0), slope surface (ẋenv = 0, ẍenv = 0), and
complex surface (ẋenv = 0, ẍenv = 0). And, the force-tracking
effect of our method is compared with classical constant
impedance control, adaptive control [25], and sliding mode
variable impedance control [27]. Fig. 5 shows the force tracking
results of different control methods in one complete sampling
period.
The above-mentioned simulation results show that the con-
stant impedance control tracks well in the plane, but is poorly ro-
bust to changing terrain (ẋenv = 0) and suffers from steady-state
errors. The sliding mode control is robust to terrain with constant
variation (ẍenv = 0) but appears to oscillate when contacting
surfaces with specific slopes. This is caused by the oscillation
of the state parameters in the neighborhood of the predesigned
slidingmodesurface.Thisexplainswhytheslidingmodecontrol
in Table II performs well on planar and most of the slopes but less
well on sinusoidal surfaces. The adaptive variable impedance
control proposed by Duan changes the impedance parameters
by force error information, which can gradually approach the
target value while ensuring stability. However, it suffers from
time lag because the feedback force comes from the current
or past moments, and the current impedance parameters do
not always meet the requirements, thus failing to track large
environmental perturbations in time. In contrast, our proposed
variable impedance control based on DRL feedforward not
only performs well under structured terrain, but is also robust
to uncertainly varying terrain. Although terrain variations are
observable but uncontrollable perturbations, the DRL controller
generates feedforward signals to compensate for the pertur-
bations based on the impedance tuning model obtained from
previous iterative learning. As shown in Table II, our method
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
LI et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING-BASED ADAPTIVE FORCE TRACKING FOR ROBOT ON UNKNOWN TERRAINS 1413
Fig. 5. Statistical comparisons between different control methods. The first row shows typical planar, oblique and sinusoidal environments. The second and third
rows of plots reflect the measured force (fm) and the measured position (xm) changes under different control methods, respectively. It can be seen that our method
(DRL control) significantly outperforms other methods in force tracking in different environments (especially for nonlinear environments).
TABLE II
COMPARISON BETWEEN VARIOUS VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL METHODS FOR DIFFERENT SURFACES
reduces the force error on nonlinear surfaces by 62.8% compared
to other variable impedance controls, while taking into account
the necessary metrics such as setting time, maximum overshoot,
and oscillation suppression.
2) Controller convergence: To verify the convergence of the
DRL feedforward controller, we tested the tracking force error
with different numbers of iterations on the same set of surfaces
(containing planar, inclined, and higher order surfaces) satisfy-
ing Properties 1–2. Fig. 6 shows the force tracking results for
different number of iterations. It is observed that the force track-
ing error gradually decreases with the increase in the number of
iterations. At the 200th iteration, the tracking error is already
acceptable.
Taking the sinusoidal surface as an example, Fig. 7 shows the
force control and impedance parameter evolution process under
different numbers of iterations. As can be seen from the results,
in the early stage of learning, the input uncertainty of the DRL
feedforward model is large due to the insufficient data collected.
Thanks to the setting of the action exploration boundary (the
second row in Fig. 7, the damping parameter needs to be kept
positive), more useful data can be obtained during the interaction
process. With the continuous enrichment of the interaction data,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
1414 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 41, 2025
Fig. 6. Mean absolute error of force tracking over the whole time interval at
the 10th, 100th, 200th, and 400th iterations.
thelearnedDRLmodelcontinuouslyimprovesthecontrolpolicy
andtunesthedistributionoftheimpedanceparameterstoachieve
better tracking results. After 400 iterations, the DRL controller
has converged to the desired impedance characteristics (fourth
column in Fig. 7). As shown in that column, during free space
(phase 1), the low damping allows the end to reach the contact
surface quickly. After contact with the environment (phase 2),
the rapidly increasing high damping allows the end to reach
the desired contact force quickly and suppresses oscillations.
When the environment changes (phase 3), accurate correction
of the reference trajectory and corresponding damping allows
the end to maintain stable tracking of the contact force. Note
that the reference trajectory at this point is not equivalent to the
stationary state of the environment; the difference between them
is K−1
envfd.
We conducted ablation studies to show the effect of the choice
of regression vector ν(t) on the convergence of the DRL con-
troller. Fig. 8 illustrates the variation of the average reward along
the iterations. The average reward of the other control methods is
also added on. DRL control policies that rely only on the inputs
and outputs of the system often result in nonconvergence or over-
fitting. Higher reward is easily obtained when the magnitude of
terrain change is small (ẋenv ≈ 0). Due to the lack of regression
on the system state s, the νu-type and νu+e-type regressors
overestimate the input u at this point, which leads to overfitting.
On the other hand, our proposed DRL control policy combining
neural network feedforward with variable impedance feedback
can solve this problem well. Through the impedance learning
process, the DRL feedforward controller can obtain the position
correction Δxr by adjusting the impedance parameters to track
the terrain change Δxenv. Therefore, the system observable state
s is necessary for the convergence of the regressors. Theorem
2 provides a theoretical justification for this while the ablation
experiments verify Theorem 2 and Corollary 1.
3) Generalization: Further, to evaluate the generalization
effect of the proposed DRL controller, we performed the gen-
eralizability test on different terrains outside the training set,
respectively. The range of environmental stiffness (N/m) is set
to [250, 25000] and the range of target force (N) is set to [10, 50].
As shown in Table III, the mean force tracking error of the
TABLE III
STATISTICAL RESULTS OF FORCE TRACKING IN DIFFERENT TERRAINS
DRL controller is less than 5% of the maximum desired force
under different terrains and can quickly stabilize and suppress
overshooting. This is because the feedforward controller accu-
rately fits the relationship between the environmental rate of
change Δxenv and the impedance parameter tuning ΔI during
the impedance learning process. Since we model the interaction
process as a Markov decision process with the same initial state,
then for any realizable desired force, there always exists a unique
interaction position on the Lipschitz continuous terrain that
makes the feedback force equal to the desired force. Thus, the
satisfaction of Assumption 1 and Properties 1–2 gives the DRL
controller the ability to generalize to unknown environments.
In summary, simulation studies show that the proposed DRL
variable impedance controller can achieve excellent tracking
results in uncertain environments.
V. EXPERIMENTS VERIFICATION
A. Experiment Setup
In this section, experiments are conducted on the test-bed
shown in Fig. 9 to verify the practical effectiveness of the
proposed DRL controller. The UR5 robot was chosen to avoid
the possible influence on the impedance learning results due to
the difference in dynamics parameters between the real robot
and the virtual digital model. The robot arm is equipped with an
ATI-Gamma force sensor (the nominal capacity of fz is 400 N
and the accuracy is 0.05 N). The self-developed DRL controller
was used to control the robot, and the control period was set at
0.05 s.
The experiments included precalibration experiments and ter-
rainexperiments.1)Calibrationexperiments.Beforeperforming
force-tracking experiments on different terrains, a calibration
step is required to compensate for the gravitational and frictional
moments of the end tool. Based on the given desired force
range, vertical contact experiments without feedforward inputs
are performed in the target environment. The contact experiment
calibrates the initial impedance parameters in the feedback
controller, which in turn yields a range for impedance tuning.
On the other hand, the measured position where the measured
force is equal to the desired force is set as the initial reference
position to meet the assumption 1 condition. The pretraining
results obtained from the simulation then need fine-tuning. A
random exploration is required for RL. To ensure training safety,
fine-tuning is therefore performed in a virtual environment. The
maximum episodes are set to 50 and the training time for each
episode is determined by a single task cycle. Therefore, the
fine-tuning process can always be completed in a limited time.
In all controller training, the objective defined by the reward
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
LI et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING-BASED ADAPTIVE FORCE TRACKING FOR ROBOT ON UNKNOWN TERRAINS 1415
Fig. 7. Impedance parameter evolution and force control process on the sinusoidal plane. The solid line and shading are the desired value and 95% confidence
interval of the DRL controller output, respectively. The first row is the contact force variation, the second row is the profile of the desired damping Bd, and the
third row is the profile of the reference trajectory xr.
Fig. 8. Comparison of average rewards for DRL control with different re-
gression vectors νu = u, νu+e = [u, e]T and νu+x = [uf + ub, s]T (Ours).
Thanks to the negative correlation between the reward and the square of the force
error, the larger cumulative rewards imply the smaller force error, i.e., the better
control results. It can be seen that the regression vector consisting of system
inputs and states enables the DRL feedforward controller to converge to the
optimum asymptotically, effectively avoiding overfitting.
functionremainsunchanged:trackingexpectedforceindifferent
environments while achieving high robustness and energy opti-
mization. The learning rate η and reward decay coefficient γ also
remain unchanged during the process. A large enough boundary
Iinf is chosen to replace ∞ for implementation convenience.
2) Terrain experiments. Variable impedance feedback signals
and fine-tuned neural network feedforward signals are integrated
into the DRL controller. The experiments comprise three differ-
ent scenes: a static environment, a quasistatic environment, and
a dynamic environment. To evaluate the proposed impedance
learning-based DRL control strategy, the following three control
conditions are compared.
Fig. 9. Experimental hardware setup. DRL controller is integrated in laptop.
1) Constant impedance control: Set B = kbI and K = kkI,
where kb and kk are constants.
2) Adaptive control: The velocity-based adaptive control is
proposed in [25]. This method is to generate adaptive
velocity adjustment from force error.
3) DRL control: The impedance learning-based DRL control
method proposed by us is used.
B. Results and Discussion
Scene 1: Robot machining. Because the material removal
by grinding is very small, the workpiece being ground can
be considered as a static environment. The designed grinding
machining experiments require the end-effector to maintain as
constant a force as possible on the surface of the workpiece
to guarantee the grinding accuracy. The workpiece is a resin
plate fixed to an aluminum alloy with dimensions 280 × 40 × 50
mm and its stiffness is unknown. A grinding head is added
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
1416 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 41, 2025
Fig. 10. Results of the robot performing a machining task under constant impedance (blue), velocity-based adaptive control (cyan), and the proposed DRL control
method (red). Terrain surface types include: a) stiffness-varying planes b) sloped surfaces, and c) curved surfaces. (a) Force tracking on flat terrain with different
stiffness switching. The switched materials include one-rubber, two-resin, three-glass, four-aluminum, and five-steel. (b) Force tracking error on oblique terrain
with different tilt angles θ ∈ [−45, 45] ◦. (c) Ratio of force tracking errors on curved terrain with different desired forces fd ∈ [1, 40] N. (a) On flat terrain. (b)
On sloped terrain. (c) On curved terrain.
to the robot end-effector, and the diameter of the grinding
head is 16 mm. After the calibration experiments are com-
pleted, three typical terrains are selected for robotic grinding
machining tests. To maintain the consistency of the initial
state, set sp(0) = sr(0) = [0.15, 0.1]T
m. In other words, the
initial position of the robot and the environment is constant
and the robot is not in contact with the environment at the
beginning.
If the contact environment is a flat terrain, it satisfies ẋenv = 0,
ẍenv = 0. To test the robustness of different control strategies
to the environmental stiffness change ΔKenv, the suddenly
changed environmental stiffness is
Kenv =

kenv0 0 s ≤ t ≤ 8 s
kenv(i) 8 s ≤ t ≤ 16 s
where kenv0 is the initial environmental stiffness, i is the num-
ber of experimental groups, and satisfies kenv(1) < kenv(2) =
kenv0 < kenv(3) < kenv(4) < kenv(5). From Fig. 10(a), it can
be seen that the desired force can be tracked after a short over-
shoot when the environmental stiffness changes. The smaller the
change in stiffness, the smaller the overshoot. The three control
methods are robust to stiffness changes in the environment.
If the contact environment is a sloped terrain, it satisfies
ẋenv = 0, ẍenv = 0. The robot moves from a flat surface to an
sloped surface with an inclination angle of θ. Fig. 10(b) shows
the force-tracking results of the three control methods. Due to
the fixed impedance parameter, the constant impedance control
tracks well on the plane but suffers from steady-state error on
the inclined plane. In contrast, the adaptive control can adjust
the impedance parameters according to the force error feedback
to track the force, but with some hysteresis. The proposed
DRL control strategy generates feedforward signals based on
orthogonal force information, which effectively removes the
hysteresis of the control process. Consistent with the results of
the simulation, our method outperforms the other two control
methods in force tracking on inclined surfaces with different
inclination angles.
If the contact environment is a curved terrain, it satis-
fies ẋenv = 0, ẍenv = 0, and other assumptions are the same.
Fig. 10(c) illustrates the results of the ratio of the errors relative
to the desired force for different desired forces. It can be seen
that the average error ratio of the proposed DRL control stays
below 5%, which is lower than the other two methods.
From the above-mentioned three experiments, it can be con-
cluded that the simulation-trained impedance learning method
shows a better force-tracking effect in the real environment and
effectively realizes the transfer of training results to the real
robot.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
LI et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING-BASED ADAPTIVE FORCE TRACKING FOR ROBOT ON UNKNOWN TERRAINS 1417
Fig. 11. Results of the robot performing the peeling task under constant impedance (blue), velocity-based adaptive control (cyan), and the proposed DRL method
(red). (a) Peeling success rate under different desired forces fd(∈ [1, 9] N). (b) Radially measured force of the peeled object under different control methods (fd
= 5 N). None of the objects contacted the end-effector at the beginning. (c) Statistics of peeling thickness for different objects (fd =5 N). Constant impedance
control for cucumber peeling does not give corresponding results because the task failed in all three tests.
Scene 2: Robot peeling. We chose three different ingre-
dients (apples, potatoes, and cucumbers) as peeling objects.
The peeling process removes the surface peel causing a small
change in the environment, so the contact surface can be vi-
sualized as a quasistatic terrain, i.e., (xenv)p+1 = (xenv)p and
(xenv)p+1 − (xenv)p ≈ 0. The ends of the objects are fixed to
the base. The robot end-effector is a stainless steel knife with a
blade length of 50 mm. After the calibration experiments are
completed, the unpeeled objects are selected for the robotic
peeling experiments.
The task is done if the peeling is continuous and there is no
jamming of the knife. Under the same conditions, the lateral
sides of the object are selected for three separate peeling tests.
Fig. 11(a) shows the success rate of each control method under
different desired forces. Constant impedance control is difficult
to apply to complex surfaces and has the lowest success rate with
an average of only 15.6%. Adaptive control and our method
effectively improve the peeling success rate (with 57.8% and
73.3%, respectively). The peeling success rate is reduced due
to the jamming of the knife caused by too large force or the
peel breakage caused by too small force. The three control
methods have the best peeling effect when the desired force
is 5 N, as shown in Fig. 11(b). In the experiments, the bumps or
depressions on the surface of the objects lead to changes in the
measured force, which in turn affects the thickness of the peel.
In contrast, the proposed control strategy can track the desired
cutting force stably. Fig. 11(c) compares the mean and standard
deviation of the thickness of the object obtained by cutting at
fd = 5 N. It can be seen that the thickness of the peel cut under
the proposed DRL control is more uniform, and the standard
deviations of its thicknesses are 0.058 mm (apple), 0.033 mm
(potato), and 0.033 mm (cucumber) are lower than those of the
adaptive control counterparts of 0.106, 0.092, and 0.177 mm.
Scene 3: Human–robot interaction. Robots with compliance
control can be used for human–robot interaction. The interaction
process is illustrated with examples of shaking hands, combing
hair, and swabbing skin between a robot and a human. Desired
forces fhandshake
d = [0, 0, 5]T
N, fcomb
d = [0.1t, 0, 2]T
N,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
1418 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 41, 2025
Fig. 12. Results of human–robot interaction under velocity-based adaptive control (cyan) and the proposed DRL method (red). (a) Measured forces for different
interaction tasks in the workspace. (b) Statistical results of tracking force errors. (c) Average human effort during human–robot interaction.
and fswab
d = [sin π(t/5 + 1), 0, 1]T
N are set for handshaking,
combing, and swabbing, respectively, to drive the robot to per-
form these tasks. Human stiffness is unknown and the epidermis
is disturbed by friction and pressure, leading to dynamic changes
in surface morphology. Therefore, the same safe position of the
arm is selected for the calibration and test experiments. Con-
sidering the poor dynamic response of the constant impedance
controlwhichmayleadtoinjuries,onlytheproposedcontroller’s
force-tracking performance relative to the adaptive feedback
control is compared, as shown in Fig. 12(a). In the handshake
test, the robot approaches the human hand at the same speed and
generates a force overshoot at the beginning. Based on the force
error information, the robot adjusts its impedance to increase
flexibility to follow the motion of the human hand. Our method
demonstrates a faster response. In the hair combing test, the
x-axis is set to gradually increase the force to drive the robot to
complete the combing task due to the damping from the hair. The
velocity-based adaptive control showed hysteresis during the
contact (from 3 s). In five consecutive swabbing tests (starting
from 2 s), the skin was stiffened due to the extrusion stack,
resulting in five sinusoidal peaks. The proposed DRL control
adapts to the stiffness variation law of the skin through the priori
impedance learning thus obtaining better force tracking. The
statistical results of the force errors for the three tasks are shown
in Fig. 12(b), where our method outperforms the adaptive control
and reduces the force error by 55.4% on average compared to
it. Since the reduction of force tracking error in human–robot
interaction may come from two aspects, i.e., the performance
improvement of the controller or the human effort, the friendli-
ness of human–robot interaction should also be considered in the
experiments. To maintain contact force stabilization, the human
can show compliance or impedance to the robot by constantly
adjusting his/her state (position or stiffness), but this will bring
about constant oscillations in xm or fm. To evaluate the human
effort Jhuman of driving the robot during the interaction, the
following formula [51] is applied:
Jhuman =
 T0
0
fT
m(t)ẋm(t) dt
where T0 is the task duration and ẋm is the interaction speed.
Fig. 12(c) shows that the human effort during human–robot
interaction is always less than or equal to that of the adaptive
control, which suggests that the reduction of force tracking
error comes entirely from the enhancement of the controller
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
LI et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING-BASED ADAPTIVE FORCE TRACKING FOR ROBOT ON UNKNOWN TERRAINS 1419
performance to exclude the deliberate human effort. On the
other hand, it also suggests that our method can reduce the
human effort used to maintain force stabilization, especially
on dynamic human–robot interaction tasks (e.g., handshaking).
Thus, the proposed DRL controller not only produces better
tracking performance, but also reduces the workload of driving
the robot and therefore has a better human–robot interaction
experience.
In the above-mentioned three experimental scenarios, static,
quasistatic, and dynamic environments are included. The pro-
posed controller can be learned in the virtual environment and
used in the complex real environment. The experimental results
verify the effectiveness of impedance learning feedforward and
the feasibility of DRL control. The designer can easily adjust the
desired impedance metrics and the robot can track the desired
force stably in uncertain environments.
VI. CONCLUSION
Force tracking is an important issue in the contact manipu-
lation of robots with uncertain environments. In this article, we
propose an interpretable DRL control policy for force tracking
in unknown environments, which is a combination of DRL
feedforward and variable impedance feedback. Two key prop-
erties of the proposed control policy are analyzed: stability and
convergence. Sufficient conditions for stability and zero-error
convergence of the proposed DRL control are given by estab-
lishing a simplified contact model of the robots interacting with
uncertain environments.
By satisfying the Lipschiz continuity condition, the
impedance learning results in the virtual environment are guar-
anteed to be safely transferred to the real environment, which
equips the robot with impedance adjustment intelligence in un-
certain environments. In conjunction with ablation experiments,
the effect of the regression vector selection on the convergence
of the feedforward network is discussed. The analysis shows
that the observable state of the uncertain system is necessary
in the learning process; otherwise it may lead to overfitting or
underfitting phenomena. This phenomenon is prevalent in other
neural network controllers that rely only on input–output.
Then, based on the results of the theoretical analysis, simula-
tion and real robot experiments were carried out under different
material terrains and different desired forces. The results show
that the proposed DRL control policy not only generalizes to
untrained scenarios, but also can perform well in static or dy-
namic uncertain environments. In future work, we will consider
extending the proposed DRL control policy to more kinds of
robot interaction tasks with uncertain environments, such as
universal grasping and bipedal running.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Ibarguren, P. Daelman, and M. Prada, “Control strategies for dual
arm co-manipulation of flexible objects in industrial environments,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Ind. Cyberphysical Syst., Tampere, Finland, 2020,
pp. 514–519.
[2] X. Qin et al., “The adaptive neural network sliding mode control for
angle/force tracking of the dexterous hand,” Adv. Mech. Eng., vol. 13,
2021, Art. no. 168781402110380.
[3] X. Li, W. Wang, and J. Yi, “Foot contact force of walk gait for a quadruped
robot,”inProc.IEEEInt.Conf.Mechatron.Automat.,Harbin,China,2016,
pp. 659–664.
[4] Z. Li, X. Li, Q. Li, H. Su, Z. Kan, and W. He, “Human-in-the-loop control
of soft exosuits using impedance learning on different terrains,” IEEE
Trans. Robot., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2979–2993, Oct. 2022.
[5] X. Chen, N. Wang, H. Cheng, and C. Yang, “Neural learning enhanced
variable admittance control for human–robot collaboration,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 25727–25737, 2020.
[6] B. Siciliano and L. Villani, Robot Force Control. Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 2000.
[7] P. Jaroonsorn et al., “Robot-assisted transcranial magnetic stimula-
tion using hybrid position/force control,” Adv. Robot., vol. 34, no. 24,
pp. 1559–1570, 2020.
[8] S. Jung and T. C. Hsia, “Force tracking impedance control of robot
manipulators for environment with damping,” in Proc. IEEE 33rd Annu.
Conf. Ind. Electron. Soc., 2007, pp. 2742–2747.
[9] H. F. N. Al-Shuka et al., “Active impedance control of bioinspired motion
robotic manipulators: An overview,” Appl. Bionics Biomech., vol. 2018,
no. 1, 2018, Art. no. 8203054.
[10] S. Hjorth and D. Chrysostomou, “Human–robot collaboration in industrial
environments: A literature review on non-destructive disassembly,” Robot.
Comput.- Integr. Manuf., vol. 73, 2022, Art. no. 102208.
[11] R. Mengacci, F. Angelini, M. G. Catalano, G. Grioli, A. Bicchi, and M.
Garabini, “Stiffness bounds for resilient and stable physical interaction
of articulated soft robots,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 4, no. 4,
pp. 4131–4138, Oct. 2019.
[12] X. Lamy, F. Colledani, and P. -O. Gutman, “Identification and exper-
imentation of an industrial robot operating in varying-impedance en-
vironments,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2010,
pp. 3138–3143.
[13] Z. Jiang, Z. Sun, H. Li, W. Ni, and J. Xu, “Designing of a kind of impedance
controller for industrial robots to assemble satellites,” in Proc. IEEE 7th
Annu. Int. Conf. Cyber Technol. Automat., Control, Intell. Syst., Honolulu,
HI, USA, 2017, pp. 436–441.
[14] P. Yuan, “An adaptive feedback scheduling algorithm for robot assembly
and real-time control systems,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst., Beijing, China, 2006, pp. 2226–2231.
[15] J. Wu et al., “Smooth transition adaptive hybrid impedance control
for connector assembly,” Ind. Robot, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 287–299,
2018.
[16] N. Rojas-García, A. Chávez-Olivares, and O. Mendoza-Gutiérrez,
“Force/position control with bounded actions on a dexterous robotic
hand with two-degree-of-freedom fingers,” Biocybernetics Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 42, pp. 233–246, 2022.
[17] S. S. Ge, Y. Li, and C. Wang, “Impedance adaptation for optimal robot–
environment interaction,” Int. J. Control, vol. 87, pp. 249–263, 2014.
[18] T. Xue, W. Wang, J. Ma, W. Liu, Z. Pan, and M. Han, “Progress and
prospects of multimodal fusion methods in physical human–robot inter-
action: A review,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 20, no. 18, pp. 10355–10370,
Sep. 2020.
[19] A. Hameed et al., “Control system design and methods for collaborative
robots: Review,” Appl. Sci., vol. 13, no. 1, 2023, Art. no. 675.
[20] H. Hu, X. Wang, and L. Chen, “Impedance with finite-time control scheme
for robot-environment interaction,” Math. Problems Eng., vol. 2020,
pp. 1–18, 2020.
[21] H. Cao, X. Chen, Y. He, and X. Zhao, “Dynamic adaptive hybrid
impedance control for dynamic contact force tracking in uncertain en-
vironments,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 83162–83174, 2019.
[22] C. Hongli, “Design of a fuzzy fractional order adaptive impedance
controller with integer order approximation for stable robotic contact
force tracking in uncertain environment,” Acta Mechanica et Automatica,
vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 16–26, 2022.
[23] Z. Li, “A fuzzy adaptive admittance controller for force tracking in an un-
certain contact environment,” IET Control Theory, vol. 15, pp. 2158–2170,
2021.
[24] S. Jung and D. J. Jeong, “Admittance force tracking control schemes for
robot manipulators under uncertain environment and dynamics,” Int. J.
Control, Automat. Syst., vol. 19, pp. 3753–3763, 2021.
[25] J. Duan et al., “Adaptive variable impedance control for dynamic contact
force tracking in uncertain environment,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 102,
pp. 54–65, 2018.
[26] J. Peng, Z. Yang, and T. Ma, “Position/Force tracking impedance control
for robotic systems with uncertainties based on adaptive Jacobian and
neural network,” Complexity, vol. 2019, pp. 1–16, 2019.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
1420 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 41, 2025
[27] M. Iskandar, C. Ott, A. Albu-Schäffer, B. Siciliano, and A. Dietrich,
“Hybrid force-impedance control for fast end-effector motions,” IEEE
Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 3931–3938, Jul. 2023.
[28] C. Li et al., “Efficient force control learning system for industrial
robots based on variable impedance control,” Sensors, vol. 18, 2018,
Art. no. 2539.
[29] L. Roveda, N. Iannacci, F. Vicentini, N. Pedrocchi, F. Braghin, and L. M.
Tosatti, “Optimal impedance force-tracking control design with impact
formulation for interaction tasks,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 130–136, Jan. 2016.
[30] L. Wang and B. Meng, “Adaptive vision-based force/position tracking
of robotic manipulators interacting with uncertain environment,” in Proc.
Chin. Control Decis. Conf., Nanchang, China, 2019, pp. 5126–5131.
[31] M. Xu, A. Hu, and H. Wang, “Image-based visual impedance force control
for contact aerial manipulation,” IEEE Trans. Automat. Sci. Eng., vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 518–527, Jan. 2023.
[32] J. R. Medina, D. Sieber, and S. Hirche, “Risk-sensitive interaction control
in uncertain manipulation tasks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat.,
Karlsruhe, Germany, 2013, pp. 502–507.
[33] B. Baigzadehnoe et al., “On position/force tracking control problem of
cooperative robot manipulators using adaptive fuzzy backstepping ap-
proach,” ISA Trans., vol. 70, pp. 432–446, 2017.
[34] Y. Shen, Y. Lu, and C. Zhuang, “A fuzzy-based impedance control for
force tracking in unknown environment,” J. Mech. Sci. Technol., vol. 36,
pp. 5231–5242, 2022.
[35] S. Ito et al., “Effect of robot position control using force information:
Human versus robot with force sensor,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Educ.
Technol., Okayama, Japan, 2021, pp. 257–261.
[36] S. Hashimura et al., “Influence of configuration error in bolted joints on
detection error of clamp force detection method,” Int. J. Automat. Technol.,
vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 396–403, 2021.
[37] B. Vanderborght et al., “Variable impedance actuators: A review,” Robot.
Auton. Syst., vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 1601–1614, 2013.
[38] J. Abu-Dakka and S. Fares Matteo, “Variable impedance control and
learning–A review,” Front. Robot. AI, vol. 7, 2020, Art. no. 590681.
[39] C. Yang, C. Zeng, P. Liang, Z. Li, R. Li, and C. -Y. Su, “Interface design of
a physical human–robot interaction system for human impedance adaptive
skill transfer,” IEEE Trans. Automat. Sci. Eng., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 329–340,
Jan. 2018.
[40] K. Kronander and A. Billard, “Learning compliant manipulation through
kinesthetic and tactile human-robot interaction,” IEEE Trans. Haptics,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 367–380, Jul.–Sep. 2014.
[41] A. Bolotnikova, S. Courtois, and A. Kheddar, “Adaptive task-space force
control for humanoid-to-human assistance,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett.,
vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 5705–5712, Jul. 2021.
[42] M. Li, Y. Wen, X. Gao, J. Si, and H. Huang, “Toward expedited impedance
tuning of a robotic prosthesis for personalized gait assistance by reinforce-
ment learning control,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 407–420,
Feb. 2022.
[43] J. van den Kieboom and A. J. Ijspeert, “Exploiting natural dynamics in
biped locomotion using variable impedance control,” in Proc. 13th IEEE-
RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2013, pp. 348–353.
[44] Z. Zhang, “A computational framework for robot hand design via rein-
forcement learning,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.,
Prague, Czech Republic, 2021, pp. 7216–7222.
[45] J. Buchli et al., “Variable impedance control - A reinforcement learning
approach,” in Proc. Conf. Robotics: Sci. Syst., Zaragoza, Spain, 2010.
[46] D. Shen, W. Zhang, and J. Xu, “Iterative learning control for discrete
nonlinear systems with randomly iteration varying lengths,” Syst. Control
Lett., vol. 96, pp. 81–87, 2016.
[47] K. Patan and M. Patan, “Neural-network-based iterative learning control
of nonlinear systems,” ISA Trans., vol. 98, pp. 445–453, 2020.
[48] H. Khalil, Nonlinear Systems, 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA:
Prentice Hall, 2002.
[49] M. Pierallini et al., “A provably stable iterative learning controller for
continuum soft robots,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 8, no. 10,
pp. 6427–6434, Oct. 2023.
[50] T. Salimans and D. P. Kingma, “Weight normalization: A. simple reparam-
eterization to accelerate training of deep neural networks,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 901–909.
[51] X. Xing, E. Burdet, W. Si, C. Yang, and Y. Li, “Impedance learning
for human-guided robots in contact with unknown environments,” IEEE
Trans. Robot., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 3705–3721, Oct. 2023.
Yanghong Li received the B.Eng. degree from the
University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, China, in 2020, where he is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in the precision instrumen-
tation and machinery.
His research interests include the force control of
the manipulator and model learning for control.
Li Zheng (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) re-
ceived the B.Eng. degree from the Dalian University
of technology, Dalian, China, in 2020. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in the precision
instrumentation and machinery with the University
of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.
His research interests include the motion planning
of the manipulator and deep reinforcement learning.
Yahao Wang received the B.Eng. degree from Anhui
Engineering University, Ma’anshan, China, in 2018.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
in the precision instrumentation and machinery with
the University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, China.
His research focuses on the motion planning of the
manipulator.
Erbao Dong (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in precision machinery and precision
instrumentation from the University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei, China, in 2005 and 2010,
respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
University of Science and Technology of China. His
researchinterestsincludeartificialmusclesandbionic
robots, intelligent mobile robots, and dual-arm col-
laborative robots.
Shiwu Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in mechanical and electronic engineering and
the Ph.D. degree in the precision instrumentation
and machinery from the University of Science and
Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China, in 1997
and 2003, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the Department of
Precision Machinery and Precision Instrumentation,
USTC. He was a Visiting Scholar with University of
Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW, Australia, in 2016,
and Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA, in
2012, respectively.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
