=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis
Michael Janner * 1 Yilun Du * 2 Joshua B. Tenenbaum 2 Sergey Levine 1
Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning methods
often use learning only for the purpose of
estimating an approximate dynamics model,
offloading the rest of the decision-making
work to classical trajectory optimizers. While
conceptually simple, this combination has a
number of empirical shortcomings, suggesting
that learned models may not be well-suited to
standard trajectory optimization. In this paper,
we consider what it would look like to fold as
much of the trajectory optimization pipeline as
possible into the modeling problem, such that
sampling from the model and planning with it
become nearly identical. The core of our technical
approach lies in a diffusion probabilistic model
that plans by iteratively denoising trajectories.
We show how classifier-guided sampling and
image inpainting can be reinterpreted as coherent
planning strategies, explore the unusual and
useful properties of diffusion-based planning
methods, and demonstrate the effectiveness of our
framework in control settings that emphasize long-
horizon decision-making and test-time flexibility.
1
Introduction
Planning with a learned model is a conceptually simple
framework for reinforcement learning and data-driven
decision-making. Its appeal comes from employing learning
techniques only where they are the most mature and
effective: for the approximation of unknown environment
dynamics in what amounts to a supervised learning problem.
Afterwards, the learned model may be plugged into classical
trajectory optimization routines (Tassa et al., 2012; Posa
et al., 2014; Kelly, 2017), which are similarly well-
understood in their original context.
*Equal contribution
1University of California, Berkeley 2MIT.
Correspondence to: janner@berkeley.edu, yilundu@mit.edu.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022.
Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
pθ(τ i−1 |τ i)
q(τ i |τ i−1)
denoising
diffusion
Figure 1. Diffuser is a diffusion probabilistic model that plans by
iteratively refining trajectories.
However, this combination rarely works as described.
Because powerful trajectory optimizers exploit learned
models, plans generated by this procedure often look more
like adversarial examples than optimal trajectories (Talvitie,
2014; Ke et al., 2018). As a result, contemporary model-
based reinforcement learning algorithms often inherit more
from model-free methods, such as value functions and policy
gradients (Wang et al., 2019), than from the trajectory
optimization toolbox.
Those methods that do rely on
online planning tend to use simple gradient-free trajectory
optimization routines like random shooting (Nagabandi
et al., 2018) or the cross-entropy method (Botev et al., 2013;
Chua et al., 2018) to avoid the aforementioned issues.
In this work, we propose an alternative approach to data-
driven trajectory optimization. The core idea is to train a
model that is directly amenable to trajectory optimization,
in the sense that sampling from the model and planning
with it become nearly identical. This goal requires a shift
in how the model is designed. Because learned dynamics
models are normally meant to be proxies for environment
dynamics, improvements are often achieved by structuring
the model according to the underlying causal process (Bapst
et al., 2019). Instead, we consider how to design a model
in line with the planning problem in which it will be used.
For example, because the model will ultimately be used
for planning, action distributions are just as important as
state dynamics and long-horizon accuracy is more important
than single-step error. On the other hand, the model should
remain agnostic to reward function so that it may be used
Code and visualizations of the learned denoising process are
available at diffusion-planning.github.io.

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis
planning horizon
denoising
Diffuser
local receptive field
Figure 2. Diffuser samples plans by iteratively denoising two-
dimensional arrays consisting of a variable number of state-action
pairs. A small receptive field constrains the model to only enforce
local consistency during a single denoising step. By composing
many denoising steps together, local consistency can drive global
coherence of a sampled plan. An optional guide function J can
be used to bias plans toward those optimizing a test-time objective
or satisfying a set of constraints.
in multiple tasks, including those unseen during training.
Finally, the model should be designed so that its plans, and
not just its predictions, improve with experience and are
resistant to the myopic failure modes of standard shooting-
based planning algorithms.
We instantiate this idea as a trajectory-level diffusion
probabilistic model (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020) called Diffuser, visualized in Figure 2. Whereas
standard model-based planning techniques predict forward
in time autoregressively, Diffuser predicts all timesteps of
a plan simultaneously. The iterative sampling process of
diffusion models leads to flexible conditioning, allowing
for auxiliary guides to modify the sampling procedure to
recover trajectories with high return or satisfying a set
of constraints. This formulation of data-driven trajectory
optimization has several appealing properties:
Long-horizon scalability
Diffuser is trained for the
accuracy of its generated trajectories rather than its single-
step error, so it does not suffer from the compounding
rollout errors of single-step dynamics models and scales
more gracefully with respect to long planning horizon.
Task compositionality Reward functions provide auxiliary
gradients to be used while sampling a plan, allowing for
a straightforward way of planning by composing multiple
rewards simultaneously by adding together their gradients.
Temporal compositionality Diffuser generates globally
coherent
trajectories
by
iteratively
improving
local
consistency, allowing it to generalize to novel trajectories
by stitching together in-distribution subsequences.
Effective non-greedy planning
By blurring the line
between model and planner, the training procedure that
improves the model’s predictions also has the effect of
improving its planning capabilities. This design yields a
learned planner that can solve the types of long-horizon,
sparse-reward problems that prove difficult for many
conventional planning methods.
The core contribution of this work is a denoising diffusion
model designed for trajectory data and an associated
probabilistic framework for behavior synthesis.
While
unconventional compared to the types of models routinely
used in deep model-based reinforcement learning, we
demonstrate that Diffuser has a number of useful properties
and is particularly effective in offline control settings that
require long-horizon reasoning and test-time flexibility.
2
Background
Our approach to planning is a learning-based analogue
of past work in behavioral synthesis using trajectory
optimization (Witkin & Kass, 1988; Tassa et al., 2012). In
this section, we provide a brief background on the problem
setting considered by trajectory optimization and the class
of generative models we employ for that problem.
2.1
Problem Setting
Consider a system governed by the discrete-time dynamics
st+1 = f(st, at) at state st given an action at. Trajectory
optimization refers to finding a sequence of actions a∗
0:T
that maximizes (or minimizes) an objective J factorized
over per-timestep rewards (or costs) r(st, at):
a∗
0:T = arg max
a0:T
J (s0, a0:T ) = arg max
a0:T
T
X
t=0
r(st, at)
where T is the planning horizon. We use the abbreviation
τ = (s0, a0, s1, a1, . . . , sT , aT ) to refer to a trajectory
of interleaved states and actions and J (τ ) to denote the
objective value of that trajectory.
2.2
Diffusion Probabilistic Models
Diffusion probabilistic models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;
Ho et al., 2020) pose the data-generating process as an
iterative denoising procedure pθ(τ i−1 | τ i). This denoising
is the reverse of a forward diffusion process q(τ i | τ i−1)
that slowly corrupts the structure in data by adding noise.
The data distribution induced by the model is given by:
pθ(τ 0) =
Z
p(τ N)
N
Y
i=1
pθ(τ i−1 | τ i)dτ 1:N
where p(τ N) is a standard Gaussian prior and τ 0 denotes
(noiseless) data. Parameters θ are optimized by minimizing

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis
a variational bound on the negative log likelihood of the
reverse process: θ∗= arg minθ −Eτ 0 
log pθ(τ 0)

. The
reverse process is often parameterized as Gaussian with
fixed timestep-dependent covariances:
pθ(τ i−1 | τ i) = N(τ i−1 | µθ(τ i, i), Σi).
The forward process q(τ i | τ i−1) is typically prespecified.
Notation.
There are two “times” at play in this work: that
of the diffusion process and that of the planning problem.
We use superscripts (i when unspecified) to denote diffusion
timestep and subscripts (t when unspecified) to denote
planning timestep. For example, s0
t refers to the tth state in a
noiseless trajectory. When it is unambiguous from context,
superscripts of noiseless quantities are omitted: τ = τ 0.
We overload notation slightly by referring to the tth state (or
action) in a trajectory τ as τst (or τat).
3
Planning with Diffusion
A major obstacle to using trajectory optimization techniques
is that they require knowledge of the environment dynamics
f. Most learning-based methods attempt to overcome this
obstacle by training an approximate dynamics model and
plugging it in to a conventional planning routine. However,
learned models are often poorly suited to the types of
planning algorithms designed with ground-truth models in
mind, leading to planners that exploit learned models by
finding adversarial examples.
We propose a tighter coupling between modeling and
planning. Instead of using a learned model in the context
of a classical planner, we subsume as much of the planning
process as possible into the generative modeling framework,
such that planning becomes nearly identical to sampling. We
do this using a diffusion model of trajectories, pθ(τ ). The
iterative denoising process of a diffusion model lends itself
to flexible conditioning by way of sampling from perturbed
distributions of the form:
˜pθ(τ ) ∝pθ(τ )h(τ ).
(1)
The function h(τ ) can contain information about prior
evidence (such as an observation history), desired outcomes
(such as a goal to reach), or general functions to optimize
(such as rewards or costs).
Performing inference in
this perturbed distribution can be seen as a probabilistic
analogue to the trajectory optimization problem posed
in Section 2.1, as it requires finding trajectories that are
both physically realistic under pθ(τ ) and high-reward (or
constraint-satisfying) under h(τ ). Because the dynamics
information is separated from the perturbation distribution
h(τ ), a single diffusion model pθ(τ ) may be reused for
multiple tasks in the same environment.
In this section, we describe Diffuser, a diffusion model
designed for learned trajectory optimization.
We then
discuss two specific instantiations of planning with Diffuser,
realized as reinforcement learning counterparts to classifier-
guided sampling and image inpainting.
3.1
A Generative Model for Trajectory Planning
Temporal ordering.
Blurring the line between sampling
from a trajectory model and planning with it yields
an unusual constraint: we can no longer predict states
autoregressively in temporal order.
Consider the goal-
conditioned inference p(s1 | s0, sT ); the next state s1
depends on a future state as well as a prior one.
This
example is an instance of a more general principle: while
dynamics prediction is causal, in the sense that the present
is determined by the past, decision-making and control can
be anti-causal, in the sense that decisions in the present
are conditional on the future.1 Because we cannot use a
temporal autoregressive ordering, we design Diffuser to
predict all timesteps of a plan concurrently.
Temporal locality.
Despite not being autoregressive or
Markovian, Diffuser features a relaxed form of temporal
locality. In Figure 2, we depict a dependency graph for a
diffusion model consisting of a single temporal convolution.
The receptive field of a given prediction only consists of
nearby timesteps, both in the past and the future. As a
result, each step of the denoising process can only make
predictions based on local consistency of the trajectory. By
composing many of these denoising steps together, however,
local consistency can drive global coherence.
Trajectory representation.
Diffuser is a model
of trajectories designed for planning, meaning that the
effectiveness of the controller derived from the model is
just as important as the quality of the state predictions.
As a result, states and actions in a trajectory are predicted
jointly; for the purposes of prediction the actions are simply
additional dimensions of the state. Specifically, we represent
inputs (and outputs) of Diffuser as a two-dimensional array:
τ =
s0
s1
...
sT
a0
a1
aT

.
(2)
with one column per timestep of the planning horizon.
Architecture.
We now have the ingredients needed to
specify a Diffuser architecture: (1) an entire trajectory
should be predicted non-autoregressively, (2) each step
of the denoising process should be temporally local,
1In general reinforcement learning contexts, conditioning on the
future emerges from the assumption of future optimality for the
purpose of writing a dynamic programming recursion. Concretely,
this appears as the future optimality variables Ot:T in the action
distribution log p(at | st, Ot:T ) (Levine, 2018).

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis
Algorithm 1 Guided Diffusion Planning
1: Require Diffuser µθ, guide J , scale α, covariances Σi
2: while not done do
3:
Observe state s; initialize plan τ N ∼N(0, I)
4:
for i = N, . . . , 1 do
5:
// parameters of reverse transition
6:
µ ←µθ(τ i)
7:
// guide using gradients of return
8:
τ i−1 ∼N(µ + αΣ∇J (µ), Σi)
9:
// constrain first state of plan
10:
τ i−1
s0
←s
11:
Execute first action of plan τ 0
a0
and (3) the trajectory representation should allow for
equivariance along one dimension (the planning horizon)
but not the other (the state and action features).
We
satisfy these criteria with a model consisting of repeated
(temporal) convolutional residual blocks.
The overall
architecture resembles the types of U-Nets that have
found success in image-based diffusion models, but with
two-dimensional spatial convolutions replaced by one-
dimensional temporal convolutions (Figure A1). Because
the model is fully convolutional, the horizon of the
predictions is determined not by the model architecture,
but by the input dimensionality; it can change dynamically
during planning if desired.
Training.
We use Diffuser to parameterize a learned
gradient ϵθ(τ i, i) of the trajectory denoising process, from
which the mean µθ can be solved in closed form (Ho et al.,
2020). We use the simplified objective for training the ϵ-
model, given by:
L(θ) = Ei,ϵ,τ 0 
∥ϵ −ϵθ(τ i, i)∥2
,
in which i ∼U{1, 2, . . . , N} is the diffusion timestep,
ϵ ∼N(0, I) is the noise target, and τ i is the trajectory
τ 0 corrupted with noise ϵ. Reverse process covariances Σi
follow the cosine schedule of Nichol & Dhariwal (2021).
3.2
Reinforcement Learning as Guided Sampling
In order to solve reinforcement learning problems with
Diffuser, we must introduce a notion of reward.
We
appeal to the control-as-inference graphical model (Levine,
2018) to do so.
Let Ot be a binary random variable
denoting the optimality of timestep t of a trajectory, with
p(Ot = 1) = exp(r(st, at)). We can sample from the set
of optimal trajectories by setting h(τ ) = p(O1:T | τ ) in
Equation 1:
˜pθ(τ ) = p(τ | O1:T = 1) ∝p(τ )p(O1:T = 1 | τ ).
We have exchanged the reinforcement learning problem for
one of conditional sampling. Thankfully, there has been
much prior work on conditional sampling with diffusion
models.
While it is intractable to sample from this
distribution exactly, when p(O1:T
| τ i) is sufficiently
smooth, the reverse diffusion process transitions can be
approximated as Gaussian (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015):
pθ(τ i−1 | τ i, O1:T ) ≈N(τ i−1; µ + Σg, Σ)
(3)
where µ, Σ are the parameters of the original reverse process
transition pθ(τ i−1 | τ i) and
g = ∇τ log p(O1:T | τ )|τ =µ
=
T
X
t=0
∇st,atr(st, at)|(st,at)=µt = ∇J (µ).
This
relation
provides
a
straightforward
translation
between classifier-guided sampling, used to generate class-
conditional images (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), and the
reinforcement learning problem setting. We first train a
diffusion model pθ(τ ) on the states and actions of all
available trajectory data. We then train a separate model
Jϕ to predict the cumulative rewards of trajectory samples
τ i. The gradients of Jϕ are used to guide the trajectory
sampling procedure by modifying the means µ of the reverse
process according to Equation 3.
The first action of a
sampled trajectory τ ∼p(τ | O1:T = 1) may be executed
in the environment, after which the planning procedure
begins again in a standard receding-horizon control loop.
Pseudocode for the guided planning method is given in
Algorithm 1.
3.3
Goal-Conditioned RL as Inpainting
Some planning problems are more naturally posed as
constraint satisfaction than reward maximization. In these
settings, the objective is to produce any feasible trajectory
that satisfies a set of constraints, such as terminating at
a goal location. Appealing to the two-dimensional array
representation of trajectories described by Equation 2,
this setting can be translated into an inpainting problem,
in which state and action constraints act analogously to
observed pixels in an image (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015).
All unobserved locations in the array must be filled in by the
diffusion model in a manner consistent with the observed
constraints.
The perturbation function required for this task is a
Dirac delta for observed values and constant elsewhere.
Concretely, if ct is state constraint at timestep t, then
h(τ ) = δct(s0, a0, . . . , sT , aT ) =
(
+∞
if ct = st
0
otherwise
The definition for action constraints is identical.
In
practice, this may be implemented by sampling from

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis
a
denoising
b
data
plan
c
τ N
→
τ N
→
d
reward −
+
plan
Figure 3. (Properties of diffusion planners) (a) Learned long-horizon planning: Diffuser’s learned planning procedure does not suffer
from the myopic failure modes common to shooting algorithms and is able to plan over long horizons with sparse reward. (b) Temporal
compositionality: Even though the model is not Markovian, it generates trajectories via iterated refinements to local consistency. As a
result, it exhibits the types of generalization usually associated with Markovian models, with the ability to stitch together snippets of
trajectories from the training data to generate novel plan. (c) Variable-length plans: Despite being a trajectory-level model, Diffuser’s
planning horizon is not determined by its architecture. The horizon can be updated after training by changing the dimensionality of the
input noise. (d) Task compositionality: Diffuser can be composed with new reward functions to plan for tasks unseen during training. In
all subfigures,
denotes a starting state and
denotes a goal state.
the unperturbed reverse process τ i−1 ∼pθ(τ i−1 | τ i) and
replacing the sampled values with conditioning values ct
after all diffusion timesteps i ∈{0, 1, . . . , N}.
Even reward maximization problems require conditioning-
by-inpainting because all sampled trajectories should begin
at the current state. This conditioning is described by line
10 in Algorithm 1.
4
Properties of Diffusion Planners
We discuss a number of Diffuser’s important properties,
focusing on those that are are either distinct from
standard dynamics models or unusual for non-autoregressive
trajectory prediction.
Learned long-horizon planning.
Single-step models
are typically used as proxies for ground-truth environment
dynamics f, and as such are not tied to any planning
algorithm in particular. In contrast, the planning routine
in Algorithm 1 is closely tied to the specific affordances
of diffusion models.
Because our planning method is
nearly identical to sampling (with the only difference
being guidance by a perturbation function h(τ )), Diffuser’s
effectiveness as a long-horizon predictor directly translates
to effective long-horizon planning. We demonstrate the
benefits of learned planning in a goal-reaching setting in
Figure 3a, showing that Diffuser is able to generate feasible
trajectories in the types of sparse reward settings where
shooting-based approaches are known to struggle.
We
explore a more quantitative version of this problem setting
in Section 5.1.
Temporal compositionality.
Single-step models are often
motivated using the Markov property, allowing them to
compose in-distribution transitions to generalize to out-
of-distribution trajectories.
Because Diffuser generates
globally coherent trajectories by iteratively improving local
consistency (Section 3.1), it can also stitch together familiar
subsequences in novel ways. In Figure 3b, we train Diffuser
on trajectories that only travel in a straight line, and show
that it can generalize to v-shaped trajectories by composing
trajectories at their point of intersection.
Variable-length plans.
Because our model is fully
convolutional in the horizon dimension of its prediction,
its planning horizon is not specified by architectural choices.
Instead, it is determined by the size of the input noise τ N ∼
N(0, I) that initializes the denoising process, allowing for
variable-length plans (Figure 3c).
Task compositionality.
While Diffuser contains
information
about
both
environment
dynamics
and
behaviors, it is independent of reward function. Because the
model acts as a prior over possible futures, planning can be
guided by comparatively lightweight perturbation functions
h(τ ) (or even combinations of multiple perturbations)
corresponding to different rewards. We demonstrate this by
planning for a new reward function unseen during training
of the diffusion model (Figure 3d).

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis
Environment
MPPI
CQL
IQL
Diffuser
Maze2D
U-Maze
33.2
5.7
47.4
113.9 ±3.1
Maze2D
Medium
10.2
5.0
34.9
121.5 ±2.7
Maze2D
Large
5.1
12.5
58.6
123.0 ±6.4
Single-task Average
16.2
7.7
47.0
119.5
Multi2D
U-Maze
41.2
-
24.8
128.9 ±1.8
Multi2D
Medium
15.4
-
12.1
127.2 ±3.4
Multi2D
Large
8.0
-
13.9
132.1 ±5.8
Multi-task Average
21.5
-
16.9
129.4
Table 1. (Long-horizon planning) The performance of Diffuser
and prior model-free algorithms in the Maze2D environment,
which tests long-horizon planning due to its sparse reward
structure.
The Multi2D setting refers to a multi-task variant
with goal locations resampled at the beginning of every episode.
Diffuser substantially outperforms prior approaches in both
settings. Appendix A details the sources for the scores of the
baseline algorithms.
5
Experimental Evaluation
The focus of our experiments is to evaluate Diffuser on
the capabilities we would like from a data-driven planner.
In particular, we evaluate (1) the ability to plan over long
horizons without manual reward shaping, (2) the ability to
generalize to new configurations of goals unseen during
training, and (3) the ability to recover an effective controller
from heterogeneous data of varying quality. We conclude by
studying practical runtime considerations of diffusion-based
planning, including the most effective ways of speeding up
the planning procedure while suffering minimally in terms
of performance.
5.1
Long Horizon Multi-Task Planning
We evaluate long-horizon planning in the Maze2D
environments (Fu et al., 2020), which require traversing
to a goal location where a reward of 1 is given. No reward
shaping is provided at any other location. Because it can
take hundreds of steps to reach the goal location, even the
best model-free algorithms struggle to adequately perform
credit assignment and reliably reach the goal (Table 1).
We plan with Diffuser using the inpainting strategy to
condition on a start and goal location. (The goal location is
also available to the model-free methods; it is identifiable
by being the only state in the dataset with non-zero
reward.) We then use the sampled trajectory as an open-loop
plan. Diffuser achieves scores over 100 in all maze sizes,
indicating that it outperforms a reference expert policy. We
visualize the reverse diffusion process generating Diffuser’s
plans in Figure 4.
While the training data in Maze2D is undirected – consisting
of a controller navigating to and from randomly selected
U-Maze
Medium
Large
denoising
Figure 4. (Planning as inpainting) Plans are generated in the
Maze2D environment by sampling trajectories consistent with
a specified start
and goal
condition. The remaining states
are “inpainted” by the denoising process.
locations – the evaluation is single-task in that the goal
is always the same. In order to test multi-task flexibility,
we modify the environment to randomize the goal location
at the beginning of each episode. This setting is denoted
as Multi2D in Table 1. Diffuser is naturally a multi-task
planner; we do not need to retrain the model from the
single-task experiments and simply change the conditioning
goal. As a result, Diffuser performs as well in the multi-
task setting as in the single-task setting. In contrast, there
is a substantial performance drop of the best model-free
algorithm in the single-task setting (IQL; Kostrikov et al.
2022) when adapted to the multi-task setting. Details of
our multi-task IQL with hindsight experience relabeling
(Andrychowicz et al., 2017) are provided in Appendix A.
MPPI uses the ground-truth dynamics; its poor performance
compared to the learned planning algorithm of Diffuser
highlights the difficulty posed by long-horizon planning
even when there are no prediction inaccuracies.
5.2
Test-time Flexibility
In order to evaluate the ability to generalize to new test-time
goals, we construct a suite of block stacking tasks with three
settings: (1) Unconditional Stacking, for which the task is
to build a block tower as tall as possible; (2) Conditional
Stacking, for which the task is to construct a block tower
with a specified order of blocks, and (3) Rearrangement,
for which the task is to match a set of reference blocks’
locations in a novel arrangement. We train all methods
on 10000 trajectories from demonstrations generated by
PDDLStream (Garrett et al., 2020); rewards are equal to
one upon successful stack placements and zero otherwise.
These block stacking are challenging diagnostics of test-

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis
Environment
BCQ
CQL
Diffuser
Unconditional Stacking
0.0
24.4
58.7 ±2.5
Conditional Stacking
0.0
0.0
45.6 ±3.1
Rearrangement
0.0
0.0
58.9 ±3.4
Average
0.0
8.1
54.4
Table 3. (Test-time flexibility) Performance of BCQ, CQL, and
Diffuser on block stacking tasks. A score of 100 corresponds to a
perfectly executed stack; 0 is that of a random policy.
time flexibility; in the course of executing a partial stack
for a randomized goal, a controller will venture into novel
states not included in the training configuration.
We use one trained Diffuser for all block-stacking tasks, only
modifying the perturbation function h(τ ) between settings.
In the Unconditional Stacking task, we directly sample
from the unperturbed denoising process pθ(τ ) to emulate
the PDDLStream controller. In the Conditional Stacking
and Rearrangement tasks, we compose two perturbation
functions h(τ ) to bias the sampled trajectories: the first
maximizes the likelihood of the trajectory’s final state
matching the goal configuration, and the second enforces
a contact constraint between the end effector and a cube
during stacking motions. (See Appendix B for details.)
We compare with two prior model-free offline reinforcement
learning algorithms: BCQ (Fujimoto et al., 2019) and
CQL (Kumar et al., 2020), training standard variants for
Unconditional Stacking and goal-conditioned variants for
Conditional Stacking and Rearrangement. (Baseline details
are provided in Appendix A.) Quantitative results are given
in Table 3, in which a score of 100 corresponds to a perfect
execution of the task. Diffuser substantially outperforms
both prior methods, with the conditional settings requiring
flexible behavior generation proving especially difficult
for the model-free algorithms. A visual depiction of an
execution by Diffuser is provided in Figure 5.
→
Figure 5. (Block stacking) A block stacking sequence executed
by Diffuser. This task is best illustrated by videos viewable at
diffusion-planning.github.io.
5.3
Offline Reinforcement Learning
Finally, we evaluate the capacity to recover an effective
single-task controller from heterogeneous data of varying
quality using the D4RL offline locomotion suite (Fu et al.,
2020). We guide the trajectories generated by Diffuser
toward high-reward regions using the sampling procedure
described in Section 3.2 and condition the trajectories on
the current state using the inpainting procedure described in
Section 3.3. The reward predictor Jϕ is trained on the same
trajectories as the diffusion model.
We compare to a variety of prior algorithms spanning
other approaches to data-driven control, including the
model-free reinforcement learning algorithms CQL (Kumar
et al., 2020) and IQL (Kostrikov et al., 2022); return-
conditioning approaches like Decision Transformer (DT;
Chen et al. 2021b); and model-based reinforcement learning
approaches including Trajectory Transformer (TT; Janner
et al. 2021), MOPO (Yu et al., 2020), MOReL (Kidambi
et al., 2020), and MBOP (Argenson & Dulac-Arnold, 2021).
In the single-task setting, Diffuser performance comparably
to prior algorithms: better than the model-based MOReL
and MBOP and return-conditioning DT, but worse than
Dataset
Environment
BC
CQL
IQL
DT
TT
MOPO
MOReL
MBOP
Diffuser
Medium-Expert
HalfCheetah
55.2
91.6
86.7
86.8
95.0
63.3
53.3
105.9
79.8 ±1.7
Medium-Expert
Hopper
52.5
105.4
91.5
107.6
110.0
23.7
108.7
55.1
107.2 ±1.3
Medium-Expert
Walker2d
107.5
108.8
109.6
108.1
101.9
44.6
95.6
70.2
108.4 ±1.9
Medium
HalfCheetah
42.6
44.0
47.4
42.6
46.9
42.3
42.1
44.6
44.2 ±0.8
Medium
Hopper
52.9
58.5
66.3
67.6
61.1
28.0
95.4
48.8
58.5 ±5.1
Medium
Walker2d
75.3
72.5
78.3
74.0
79.0
17.8
77.8
41.0
79.7 ±1.5
Medium-Replay
HalfCheetah
36.6
45.5
44.2
36.6
41.9
53.1
40.2
42.3
42.2 ±2.8
Medium-Replay
Hopper
18.1
95.0
94.7
82.7
91.5
67.5
93.6
12.4
96.8 ±0.8
Medium-Replay
Walker2d
26.0
77.2
73.9
66.6
82.6
39.0
49.8
9.7
61.2 ±6.7
Average
51.9
77.6
77.0
74.7
78.9
42.1
72.9
47.8
75.3
Table 2. (Offline reinforcement learning) The performance of Diffuser and a variety of prior algorithms on the D4RL locomotion
benchmark (Fu et al., 2020). Results for Diffuser correspond to the mean and standard error over 15 random seeds (three independently
trained diffusion models and five trajectories per model). We detail the sources for the performance of prior methods in Appendix A.3.
Following Kostrikov et al. (2022), we emphasize in bold scores within 5 percent of the maximum per task (≥0.95 · max).

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis
denoising
planning horizon
Figure 6. (Guided sampling) Diffuser generates all timesteps
of a plan concurrently, instead of autoregressively, through the
denoising process.
the best offline techniques designed specifically for single-
task performance. We also investigated a variant using
Diffuser as a dynamics model in conventional trajectory
optimizers such as MPPI (Williams et al., 2015), but found
that this combination performed no better than random,
suggesting that the effectiveness of Diffuser stems from
coupled modeling and planning, and not from improved
open-loop predictive accuracy.
5.4
Warm-Starting Diffusion for Faster Planning
A limitation of Diffuser is that individual plans are slow
to generate (due to iterative generation). Na¨ıvely, as we
execute plans open loop, a new plan must be regenerated
at each step of execution. To improve execution speed of
Diffuser, we may further reuse previously generated plans
to warm-start generations of subsequent plans.
To warm-start planning, we may run a limited number of
forward diffusion steps from a previously generated plan and
then run a corresponding number of denoising steps from
this partially noised trajectory to regenerate an updated plan.
In Figure 7, we illustrate the trade-off between performance
and runtime budget as we vary the underlying number of
denoising steps used to regenerate each a new plan from 2 to
100. We find that we may reduce the planning budget of our
approach markedly with only modest drop in performance.
6
Related Work
Advances in deep generative modeling have recently
made inroads into model-based reinforcement learning,
with multiple lines of work exploring dynamics models
parameterized as convolutional U-networks (Kaiser et al.,
2020), stochastic recurrent networks (Ke et al., 2018;
10−1
100
planning budget (seconds)
75
85
95
105
normalized score (a.u.)
Performance versus runtime
Figure 7. (Fast Planning) Performance of Diffuser on Walker2d
Medium-Expert when varying the number of diffusion steps to
warm-start planning. Performance suffers only minimally even
when using one-tenth the number of diffusion steps, as long as
plans are initialized from the previous timestep’s plan.
Hafner et al., 2021a; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018), vector-
quantized autoencoders (Hafner et al., 2021b; Ozair et al.,
2021), neural ODEs (Du et al., 2020a), normalizing flows
(Rhinehart et al., 2020; Janner et al., 2020), generative
adversarial networks (Eysenbach et al., 2021), energy-
based models (EBMs; Du et al. 2019), graph neural
networks (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2018), neural radiance
fields (Li et al., 2021), and Transformers (Janner et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2021a). These investigations generally
assume an abstraction barrier between the model and
planner. Specifically, the role of learning is relegated to
approximating environment dynamics; once learning is
complete the model may be inserted into any of a variety
of planning (Botev et al., 2013; Williams et al., 2015)
or policy optimization (Sutton, 1990; Wang et al., 2019)
algorithms because the form of the planner does not depend
strongly on the form of the model. Our goal is to break
this abstraction barrier by designing a model and planning
algorithm that are trained alongside one another, resulting
in a non-autoregressive trajectory-level model for which
sampling and planning are nearly identical.
A number of parallel lines of work have studied how
to break the abstraction barrier between model learning
and planning in different ways.
Approaches include
training an autoregressive latent-space model for reward
prediction (Tamar et al., 2016; Oh et al., 2017; Schrittwieser
et al., 2019); weighing model training objectives by state
values (Farahmand et al., 2017); and applying collocation
techniques to learned single-step energies (Du et al., 2019;
Rybkin et al., 2021).
In contrast, our method plans
by modeling and generating all timesteps of a trajectory
concurrently, instead of autoregressively, and conditioning
the sampled trajectories with auxiliary guidance functions.

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis
Diffusion models have emerged as a promising class
of generative model that formulates the data-generating
process as an iterative denoising procedure (Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020). The denoising procedure
can be seen as parameterizing the gradients of the data
distribution (Song & Ermon, 2019), connecting diffusion
models to score matching (Hyv¨arinen, 2005) and EBMs
(LeCun et al., 2006; Du & Mordatch, 2019; Nijkamp
et al., 2019; Grathwohl et al., 2020). Iterative, gradient-
based sampling lends itself towards flexible conditioning
(Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) and compositionality (Du
et al., 2020b), which we use to recover effective behaviors
from heterogeneous datasets and plan for reward functions
unseen during training. While diffusion models have been
developed for the generation of images (Song et al., 2021),
waveforms (Chen et al., 2021c), 3D shapes (Zhou et al.,
2021), and text (Austin et al., 2021), to the best of our
knowledge they have not previously been used in the context
of reinforcement learning or decision-making.
7
Conclusion
We have presented Diffuser, a denoising diffusion model for
trajectory data. Planning with Diffuser is almost identical
to sampling from it, differing only in the addition of
auxiliary perturbation functions that serve to guide samples.
The learned diffusion-based planning procedure has a
number of useful properties, including graceful handling of
sparse rewards, the ability to plan for new rewards without
retraining, and a temporal compositionality that allows it to
produce out-of-distribution trajectories by stitching together
in-distribution subsequences. Our results point to a new
class of diffusion-based planning procedures for deep model-
based reinforcement learning.
Code References
We used the following open-source libraries for this work:
NumPy (Harris et al., 2020), PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019),
and Diffusion Models in PyTorch (Wang, 2020).
Acknowledgements
We thank Ajay Jain for feedback on an early draft and Leslie
Kaelbling, Tom´as Lozano-P´erez, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein,
Ben Eysenbach, Amy Zhang, Colin Li, and Toru Lin for
helpful discussions. This work was partially supported by
computational resource donations from Microsoft. M.J.
is supported by fellowships from the National Science
Foundation and the Open Philanthropy Project.
Y.D.
is supported by a fellowship from the National Science
Foundation.
References
Andrychowicz, M., Wolski, F., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Fong,
R., Welinder, P., McGrew, B., Tobin, J., Abbeel, P., and
Zaremba, W. Hindsight experience replay. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2017.
Argenson, A. and Dulac-Arnold, G. Model-based offline
planning.
In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2021.
Austin, J., Johnson, D. D., Ho, J., Tarlow, D., and van den
Berg, R.
Structured denoising diffusion models in
discrete state-spaces. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2021.
Bapst, V., Sanchez-Gonzalez, A., Doersch, C., Stachenfeld,
K. L., Kohli, P., Battaglia, P. W., and Hamrick,
J. B. Structured agents for physical construction. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Botev, Z. I., Kroese, D. P., Rubinstein, R. Y., and L’Ecuyer, P.
The cross-entropy method for optimization. In Handbook
of Statistics, volume 31, chapter 3. 2013.
Chen, C., Yoon, J., Wu, Y.-F., and Ahn, S. TransDreamer:
Reinforcement learning with transformer world models,
2021a.
Chen, L., Lu, K., Rajeswaran, A., Lee, K., Grover, A.,
Laskin, M., Abbeel, P., Srinivas, A., and Mordatch,
I.
Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via
sequence modeling. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2021b.
Chen, N., Zhang, Y., Zen, H., Weiss, R. J., Norouzi, M., and
Chan, W. Wavegrad: Estimating gradients for waveform
generation. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2021c.
Chua, K., Calandra, R., McAllister, R., and Levine, S.
Deep reinforcement learning in a handful of trials using
probabilistic dynamics models. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. 2018.
Dhariwal, P. and Nichol, A. Q. Diffusion models beat GANs
on image synthesis. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2021.
Du, J., Futoma, J., and Doshi-Velez, F.
Model-
based reinforcement learning for semi-markov decision
processes with neural odes.
In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2020a.
Du, Y. and Mordatch, I.
Implicit generation and
generalization in energy-based models. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis
Du, Y., Lin, T., and Mordatch, I. Model based planning with
energy based models. In Conference on Robot Learning,
2019.
Du, Y., Li, S., and Mordatch, I.
Compositional visual
generation with energy based models. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020b.
Eysenbach,
B.,
Khazatsky,
A.,
Levine,
S.,
and
Salakhutdinov, R. Mismatched no more: Joint model-
policy optimization for model-based rl. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.02758, 2021.
Farahmand, A.-M., Barreto, A., and Nikovski, D. Value-
aware loss function for model-based reinforcement
learning.
In International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics, 2017.
Fu, J., Kumar, A., Nachum, O., Tucker, G., and Levine,
S. D4RL: Datasets for deep data-driven reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020.
Fujimoto, S., Meger, D., and Precup, D.
Off-policy
deep reinforcement learning without exploration.
In
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Garrett, C. R., Lozano-P´erez, T., and Kaelbling, L. P.
Pddlstream: Integrating symbolic planners and blackbox
samplers
via
optimistic
adaptive
planning.
In
International Conference on Automated Planning and
Scheduling, 2020.
Grathwohl, W., Wang, K.-C., Jacobsen, J.-H., Duvenaud, D.,
and Zemel, R. Learning the stein discrepancy for training
and evaluating energy-based models without sampling.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Ha, D. and Schmidhuber, J.
Recurrent world models
facilitate policy evolution.
In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Fischer, I., Villegas, R., Ha, D.,
Lee, H., and Davidson, J. Learning latent dynamics for
planning from pixels. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2021a.
Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T. P., Norouzi, M., and Ba,
J.
Mastering atari with discrete world models.
In
International Conference on Learning Representations,
2021b.
Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., Gommers,
R., Virtanen, P., Cournapeau, D., Wieser, E., Taylor, J.,
Berg, S., Smith, N. J., Kern, R., Picus, M., Hoyer, S., van
Kerkwijk, M. H., Brett, M., Haldane, A., del R´ıo, J. F.,
Wiebe, M., Peterson, P., G´erard-Marchant, P., Sheppard,
K., Reddy, T., Weckesser, W., Abbasi, H., Gohlke, C.,
and Oliphant, T. E. Array programming with NumPy.
Nature, 585(7825):357–362, 2020.
Ho, J., Jain, A., and Abbeel, P.
Denoising diffusion
probabilistic models. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2020.
Hyv¨arinen, A. Estimation of non-normalized statistical
models by score matching. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 2005.
Janner, M., Mordatch, I., and Levine, S.
γ-models:
Generative temporal difference learning for infinite-
horizon prediction. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2020.
Janner, M., Li, Q., and Levine, S. Offline reinforcement
learning as one big sequence modeling problem.
In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2021.
Kaiser, L., Babaeizadeh, M., Miłos, P., Osi´nski, B.,
Campbell, R. H., Czechowski, K., Erhan, D., Finn, C.,
Kozakowski, P., Levine, S., Mohiuddin, A., Sepassi,
R., Tucker, G., and Michalewski, H.
Model based
reinforcement learning for atari.
In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Ke, N. R., Singh, A., Touati, A., Goyal, A., Bengio, Y.,
Parikh, D., and Batra, D. Modeling the long term future
in model-based reinforcement learning. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Kelly, M. An introduction to trajectory optimization: How
to do your own direct collocation. SIAM Review, 59(4):
849–904, 2017.
Kidambi, R., Rajeswaran, A., Netrapalli, P., and Joachims,
T. MOReL: Model-based offline reinforcement learning.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2020.
Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2015.
Kostrikov, I., Nair, A., and Levine, S. Offline reinforcement
learning with implicit Q-learning.
In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Kumar, A., Zhou, A., Tucker, G., and Levine, S.
Conservative Q-learning for offline reinforcement
learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2020.
LeCun, Y., Chopra, S., Hadsell, R., Huang, F. J., and
et al. A tutorial on energy-based learning. In Predicting
Structured Data. MIT Press, 2006.
Levine, S.
Reinforcement learning and control as
probabilistic inference: Tutorial and review.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1805.00909, 2018.

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis
Li, Y., Li, S., Sitzmann, V., Agrawal, P., and Torralba, A. 3d
neural scene representations for visuomotor control. In
Conference on Robot Learning, 2021.
Misra, D. Mish: A self regularized non-monotonic neural
activation function. In British Machine Vision Conference,
2019.
Nagabandi, A., Kahn, G., S. Fearing, R., and Levine,
S.
Neural network dynamics for model-based deep
reinforcement learning with model-free fine-tuning. In
International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
2018.
Nichol, A. Q. and Dhariwal, P. Improved denoising diffusion
probabilistic models. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2021.
Nijkamp, E., Hill, M., Zhu, S.-C., and Wu, Y. N. Learning
non-convergent non-persistent short-run MCMC toward
energy-based model. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2019.
Oh, J., Singh, S., and Lee, H. Value prediction network.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2017.
Ozair, S., Li, Y., Razavi, A., Antonoglou, I., Van Den Oord,
A., and Vinyals, O. Vector quantized models for planning.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J.,
Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga,
L., Desmaison, A., Kopf, A., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Raison,
M., Tejani, A., Chilamkurthy, S., Steiner, B., Fang, L.,
Bai, J., and Chintala, S. Pytorch: An imperative style,
high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems. 2019.
Posa, M., Cantu, C., and Tedrake, R. A direct method for
trajectory optimization of rigid bodies through contact.
The International Journal of Robotics Research, 2014.
Rhinehart, N., McAllister, R., and Levine, S. Deep imitative
models for flexible inference, planning, and control. In
International Conference on Learning Representations,
2020.
Rybkin, O., Zhu, C., Nagabandi, A., Daniilidis, K.,
Mordatch, I., and Levine, S. Model-based reinforcement
learning via latent-space collocation. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9190–9201.
PMLR, 2021.
Sanchez-Gonzalez, A., Heess, N., Springenberg, J. T.,
Merel, J., Riedmiller, M., Hadsell, R., and Battaglia, P.
Graph networks as learnable physics engines for inference
and control. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2018.
Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Hubert, T., Simonyan, K.,
Sifre, L., Schmitt, S., Guez, A., Lockhart, E., Hassabis,
D., Graepel, T., Lillicrap, T., and Silver, D. Mastering
atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned
model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08265, 2019.
Sohl-Dickstein, J., Weiss, E., Maheswaranathan, N.,
and Ganguli, S.
Deep unsupervised learning using
nonequilibrium thermodynamics.
In International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.
Song, J., Meng, C., and Ermon, S. Denoising diffusion
implicit models. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2021.
Song, Y. and Ermon, S. Generative modeling by estimating
gradients of the data distribution. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Sutton, R. S.
Integrated architectures for learning,
planning, and reacting based on approximating dynamic
programming. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, 1990.
Talvitie, E. Model regularization for stable sample rollouts.
In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
2014.
Tamar, A., Wu, Y., Thomas, G., Levine, S., and Abbeel,
P.
Value iteration networks.
In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. 2016.
Tassa, Y., Erez, T., and Todorov, E.
Synthesis and
stabilization of complex behaviors through online
trajectory optimization. In International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2012.
Wang,
P.
Implementation of denoising diffusion
probabilistic
models
in
pytorch,
2020.
URL
https://github.com/lucidrains/
denoising-diffusion-pytorch.
Wang, T., Bao, X., Clavera, I., Hoang, J., Wen, Y.,
Langlois, E., Zhang, S., Zhang, G., Abbeel, P., and Ba,
J. Benchmarking model-based reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02057, 2019.
Williams, G., Aldrich, A., and Theodorou, E.
Model
predictive path integral control using covariance variable
importance sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.01149,
2015.
Witkin, A. and Kass, M. Spacetime constraints. ACM
Siggraph Computer Graphics, 1988.
Wu, Y. and He, K. Group normalization. In European
Conference on Computer Vision, 2018.

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis
Yu, T., Thomas, G., Yu, L., Ermon, S., Zou, J., Levine,
S., Finn, C., and Ma, T. MOPO: Model-based offline
policy optimization. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2020.
Zhou, L., Du, Y., and Wu, J.
3D shape generation
and completion through point-voxel diffusion.
In
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis
Appendix A
Baseline details and sources
In this section, we provide details about baselines we ran
ourselves. For scores of baselines previously evaluated on
standardized tasks, we provide the source of the listed score.
A.1
Maze2D experiments
Single-task.
The performance of CQL and IQL on the
standard Maze2D environments is reported in the D4RL
whitepaper (Fu et al., 2020) in Table 2.
We ran IQL using the offical implementation from the
authors:
github.com/ikostrikov/implicit q learning.
We tuned over two hyperparameters:
1. temperature ∈[3, 10]
2. expectile ∈[0.65, 0.95]
Multi-task.
We only evaluated IQL on the Multi2D
environments because it is the strongest baseline in the
single-task Maze2D environments by a sizeable margin. To
adapt IQL to the multi-task setting, we modified the Q-
functions, value function, and policy to be goal-conditioned.
To select goals during training, we employed a strategy
based on hindsight experience replay, in which we sampled
a goal from among those states encountered in the future of a
trajectory. For a training backup (st, at, st+1), we sampled
goals according to a geometric distribution over the future
∆∼Geom(1 −γ)
g = st+∆,
recalculated rewards based on the sampled goal, and
conditioned all relevant models on the goal during updating.
During testing, we conditioned the policy on the ground-
truth goal.
We tuned over the same IQL parameters as in the single-task
setting.
A.2
Block stacking experiments
Single-task.
We
ran
CQL
using
the
following
implementation
https://github.com/young-geng/cql.
and used default hyperparameters in the code. We ran BCQ
using the author’s original implementation
https://github.com/sfujim/BCQ.
For BCQ, we tuned over two hyperparameters:
1. discount factor ∈[0.9, 0.999]
2. tau ∈[0.001, 0.01]
t
x 
Conv1D 
FC Layer
Conv1D 
GN Mish
GN, Mish
Figure A1. Diffuser has a U-Net architecture with residual blocks
consisting of temporal convolutions, group normalization, and
Mish nonlinearities.
Multi-task.
To evaluate BCQ and CQL in the multi-
task setting, we modified the Q-functions, value function
and policy to be goal-conditioned. We trained using goal
relabeling as in the Multi2D environments. We tuned over
the same hyperparameters described in the single-task block
stacking experiments.
A.3
Offline Locomotion
The scores for BC, CQL, IQL, and AWAC are from Table 1
in Kostrikov et al. (2022). The scores for DT are from
Table 2 in Chen et al. (2021b). The scores for TT are from
Table 1 in Janner et al. (2021). The scores for MOReL are
from Table 2 in Kidambi et al. (2020). The scores for MBOP
are from Table 1 in Argenson & Dulac-Arnold (2021).
Appendix B
Test-time Flexibility
To guide Diffuser to stack blocks in specified configurations,
we used two separate perturbation functions h(τ ) to specify
a given stack of block A on top of block B, which we detail
below.
Final State Matching
To enforce a final state consisting
of block A on top of block B, we trained a perturbation
function hmatch(τ ) as a per-timestep classifier determining
whether a a state s exhibits a stack of block A on top of
block B. We train the classifier on the demonstration data as
the diffusion model.
Contact Constraint
To guide the Kuka arm to stack
block A on top of block B, we construct a perturbation
function hcontact(τ ) = P64
i=0 −1 ∗∥τci −1∥2, where τci
corresponds to the underlying dimension in state τsi that
specifies the presence or absence of contact between the
Kuka arm and block A. We apply the contact constraint
between the Kuka arm and block A for the first 64 timesteps
in a trajectory, corresponding to initial contact with block A
in a plan.
Appendix C
Implementation Details
In this section we describe the architecture and record
hyperparameters.

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis
1. The architecture of Diffuser (Figure A1) consists of
a U-Net structure with 6 repeated residual blocks.
Each block consisted of two temporal convolutions,
each followed by group norm (Wu & He, 2018), and
a final Mish nonlinearity (Misra, 2019). Timestep
embeddings are produced by a single fully-connected
layer and added to the activations of the first temporal
convolution within each block.
2. We train the model using the Adam optimizer (Kingma
& Ba, 2015) with a learning rate of 4e−05 and batch
size of 32. We train the models for 500k steps.
3. The return predictor J has the structure of the first half
of the U-Net used for the diffusion model, with a final
linear layer to produce a scalar output.
4. We use a planning horizon T of 100 in all locomotion
tasks, 128 for blocking stacking, 128 in Maze2D /
Multi2D U-Maze, 265 in Maze2D / Multi2D Medium,
and 384 in Maze2D / Multi2D Large.
5. We use N = 100 diffusion steps.
6. We use a guide scale of α = 0.001.
7. We tuned over discount factors for the return prediction
Jϕ, but found that above γ = 0.99 planning was
insensitive to changes in discount factor.
8. We
found
that
control
performance
was
not
substantially affected by the choice of predicting noise
ϵ versus uncorrupted data τ 0 with the diffusion model.
