=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
        850                                                                             IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 4, AUGUST 2015

        Variable Impedance Control of Redundant
        Manipulators for Intuitive Human–Robot
                   Physical Interaction

          Fanny Ficuciello, Member, IEEE, Luigi Villani, Senior Member, IEEE, and Bruno Siciliano, Fellow, IEEE



         Abstract—This paper  presents an  experimental  study on   redundant robots, also the redundant degrees of freedom (DOFs)
      human–robot comanipulation in the presence of kinematic redun-  may play an important role both in the stability of the coupled
       dancy. The objective of the work is to enhance the performance                                                               system and in the quality of performance.
      during human–robot physical interaction by combining Carte-
                                                                    This paper presents an experimental study on a variable       sian impedance modulation and redundancy resolution. Cartesian
      impedance control is employed to achieve a compliant behavior of  impedance control of a redundant manipulator not speciﬁcally
       the robot’s end effector in response to forces exerted by the hu-   designed for human–robot cooperation, used for the execution
     man operator. Different impedance modulation strategies, which   of a task under human guidance. In particular, a cooperative
       take into account the human’s behavior during the interaction,                                                                       writing task is used as case study, and a Cartesian impedance
       are selected with the support of a simulation study and then ex-
                                                                        control law is adopted to achieve a compliant behavior of the       perimentally tested on a 7-degree-of-freedom KUKA LWR4. A
      comparative study to establish the most effective redundancy res-  end effector with respect to the forces exerted by the human
       olution strategy has been made by evaluating different solutions   operator.
       compatible with the considered task. The experiments have shown    The main idea of the paper is that of using in a synergic
       that the redundancy, when used to ensure a decoupled apparent                                                     way the robot’s redundancy and the modulation of the Carte-
        inertia at the end effector, allows enlarging the stability region in
                                                                         sian impedance parameters to enhance the performance during       the impedance parameters space and improving the performance.
     On the other hand, the variable impedance with a suitable mod-  human–robot physical interaction. In particular, an experimen-
       ulation strategy for parameters’ tuning outperforms the constant    tal evaluation of different impedance modulation laws within a
      impedance, in the sense that it enhances the comfort perceived by   stability region is carried out, while it is shown that the over-
      humans during manual guidance and allows reaching a favorable                                                                                        all performance can be improved when the redundancy is used
      compromise between accuracy and execution time.
                                                                           to enlarge the stability region in the space of the impedance
         Index Terms—Force control, physical human–robot interaction,   parameters.
      redundant robots.                                              Considering that instability is likely to occur during inter-
                                                                        action when the controller attempts to impose to the robot an
                                                             impedance behavior, which is signiﬁcantly different from the                                        I. INTRODUCTION
                                                                                intrinsic hardware dynamics, in a recent paper [3], we have
      N the face of the unpredictability of human behaviors, the   proposed to exploit redundancy to make the robot equivalent
          adoption of suitable impedance strategies [1], [2] to control   inertia at the end effector as close as possible to the desired iner-  I
       robots in the presence of humans is an essential paradigm to en-    tia. In particular, since comanipulation tasks typically require a
       sure reliability and safety. For advanced robots, which operate   decoupled impedance along the Cartesian directions, the redun-
       in anthropic environments by cooperating with humans and sub-   dant DOFs are used to reduce as much as possible the dynamic
        stituting them in some tasks, the quality of performance is not   coupling of the end effector equivalent inertia.
        just about accuracy and repeatability. Indeed, it rather depends    The preliminary results presented in [3] are extended here
      on the ability of the robots to adapt their behaviors dynamically   through an extensive experimental study to establish the most
      and according to the task and human intentions. In the case of   advantageous solution for the use of redundancy. In detail, it is
                                                         shown that robot’s redundancy, when used to ensure a decoupled
                                                                    apparent inertia at the end effector, allows enlarging the stability
          Manuscript received December 31, 2014; revised March 8, 2015; accepted   region in the impedance parameters space and improves the
        April 30, 2015. Date of publication May 20, 2015; date of current version August   performance.
         4, 2015. This paper was recommended for publication by Associate Editor V.
        Kyrki and Editor A. Kheddar upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This    On the other side, different modulation strategies for the
       work was supported in part by the EC Seventh Framework Programme (FP7)  impedance parameters are proposed and tested. The parame-
        within SAPHARI project 287513 and RoDyMan project 320992.               ters are modulated online during the interaction according to
         The authors are with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria  Elettrica e Tec-
        nologie dell’Informazione,  Universit`a  degli Studi  di Napoli Federico  II,   the human’s behavior, which is inferred through the measure-
       80125 Napoli, Italy (e-mail: fanny.ﬁcuciello@unina.it; luigi.villani@unina.it;   ments of the end effector velocities. The solution adopted for
         bruno.siciliano@unina.it).                                         our robotic platform consists on linking the parameters varia-
          This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at http://
         ieeexplore.ieee.org.                                                    tion directly to the Cartesian velocity. This approach has been
          Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online   validated by means of a preliminary simulation study and tested
          at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.                                          experimentally.
           Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TRO.2015.2430053


                            1552-3098 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NanjingSeeUniversityhttp://www.ieee.org/publicationsof Information Science andstandards/publications/rights/index.htmlTechnology. Downloaded on August 13,2026for moreat 07:03:57information.UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
      FICUCIELLO et al.: VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL OF REDUNDANT MANIPULATORS                                                                851


       The experimental results show that the variable impedance   system to deal with instability [10]. Inspired to these studies, a
      control performs better than the impedance control with con-   learning control technique is proposed in [11] to optimally adapt
      stant parameters, in the sense that it preserves accuracy while   robot’s impedance during the interaction with dynamic environ-
     reducing the execution time, in comparison with high constant   ments and humans. Learning techniques have been adopted also
     impedance, and it guarantees a good execution speed with in-   to extract and transfer impedance modulation strategies from
      creased accuracy, in comparison with low constant impedance.  humans to variable impedance robots [12] or, complementary,
      Finally, the use of the variable impedance strategy together with   to teach variable stiffness tasks to robots through physical inter-
      Cartesian inertia decoupling through redundancy resolution is   action with a human operator [13].
      the combination that allows the best performance and effectively   A further method to transfer human skills in impedance regu-
     enhances the comfort level perceived by the human operators   lation to robots interacting with uncertain environments is based
     during manual guidance. In our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst paper  on the concept of teleimpedance [14]. In this case, a suitable
     where variable impedance and redundancy resolution are used  human–machine interface allows us to provide the slave robot
      in a combined way to improve stability and performance during   with a position reference and an end-point stiffness reference;
    human guidance.                                                      this latter is estimated in real time from the measured elec-
        This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes re-  tromyogram signals of eight muscles of the arm of the human
      search work related to impedance modulation strategies and   master.
       stability issues in human–robot interaction. In Section III, the     In the applications where the robot must be free to move un-
      Cartesian impedance control of redundant robots is brieﬂy sum-   der the forces applied by humans, the desired stiffness is usually
     marized, while the possible criteria for redundancy resolution   set to zero, as well as the desired position, while the damping
      are presented in Section IV. Section V presents the experimental   and mass parameters can be tuned, for example, depending on
      study that has been performed to estimate the stability region   the velocity and acceleration of the human operator [15]. On
      in the impedance parameter space. In Section VI, the rules for   the other hand, in surgical and rehabilitation scenarios, stiff-
      the selection of the impedance parameters are discussed. The   ness regulation plays an important role to ensure accuracy and
     experimental evaluation of the different options for redundancy   safety in the presence of both preplanned target and interac-
      resolution as well as for the selection of the impedance modu-   tion with unpredictable dynamic environments. An interesting
      lation laws is presented in Section VII. Finally, a discussion of  method that allows us to reproduce a speciﬁc time-varying stiff-
      the results and the conclusion is drawn in Sections VIII and IX,   ness proﬁle during needle insertion by preserving passivity is
      respectively.                                               proposed in [16], while the implementation of safe constraints
                                                                 along a speciﬁc task or to limit the user to stay within a safe
                                   II. RELATED WORKS                                                                    region is considered in [17]. These topics are also of inter-
        In recent years, the research effort on ﬁnding appropriate   est in the applications where collaborative robots (Cobots) are
     impedance control strategies for human–robot physical inter-  employed [18].
      action is going toward learning and imitation of impedance     For variable impedance control, a crucial issue is that stability
     modulation strategies of living beings.                       must be guaranteed for all the possible range of variation of the
     A possible solution is represented by variable impedance ac-   parameters. The stability depends on how impedance control
      tuators (VIAs) using different technologies to create a new gen-    is implemented (e.g., with or without force measurements, or
      eration of robots that can regulate their impedance behavior in   whether an impedance or an admittance law is used), but also
     a controlled way [4].                                    on the robot’s hardware; namely, the robot kinematics and dy-
       For robot manipulators not using VIAs, a number of adap-   namics, the kind of transmission, the presence of friction and
       tive impedance/admittance strategies have been proposed for   of structural compliance, the kind of sensors and actuators [15],
     human–robot collaborative tasks, where the control gains are   [19]. Moreover, the overall coupled dynamics of the robot and
     tuned on the basis of the inferred human intentions. Several  human must be considered [20].
      studies propose modulation strategies based on the estimation      Stability of impedance control has been investigated in the
      of the human impedance computed using the forces and the   seminal works of Hogan [1] and later on in [21], using the
      positions measured during the task execution. In [5] and [6],   concept of passivity, and in [22], where the natural admittance
      the variation of the impedance parameters is determined on the   control is introduced. Admittance and impedance are deﬁned
      basis of the data collected from experiments where a robot and   in a reciprocal way: Impedance control produces forces/torques
     a human execute the cooperative task. In [5], a simple switch-   in response to velocities, while admittance control produces
      ing strategy between preselected values is implemented, while   velocities in response to forces and torques.
      in [6], an optimal value for the damping, which minimizes a    When the robot is driven by the human, a low robot impedance
      suitable cost function, is computed online.                            is typically required. In particular, the stiffness should be low and
       The estimation of the human operator’s arm impedance is not   often null, while damping should be decreased when fast move-
      easy, and some simpliﬁcations may occur. For example, at low   ments without particular accuracy are required and increased to
      velocities, the stiffness is usually computed assuming that it is   perform ﬁne motions. On the other hand, the apparent inertia of
      the dominant impedance feature [7], [8]. More accurate mea-   the robot cannot be arbitrarily decreased because the stability
     surements methods of human impedance have been adopted by   can be lost.
      neuroscientists to analyze human movement control [9] and,     Often, the structural impedance of common robots, includ-
      in particular, the strategy used by the human central nervous   ing lightweight robots like the KUKA LWR4 arm considered

Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
        852                                                                             IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 4, AUGUST 2015


       in this paper, is higher than the ideal impedance required for     Equation (2) describes only the end effector dynamics and
      an effective cooperation with humans. In particular, the equiva-   does not include the so-called null space dynamics. Matrix J†
       lent inertia of the robot at the contact point (which hereafter is    is the dynamically consistent generalized inverse of matrix J,
      assumed to be the end effector) may be too high and must be  deﬁned as [26]
       reduced. This can be done by using feedback of the exchanged                                                                    J† = M −1JT [JM −1JT ]−1.              (3)
       force.
         In this respect, using a simple 1-DOF model,  it has been    It can be proven that, only with this choice of generalized in-
       theoretically proven that, by reducing the inertia more than a   verse, the null-space dynamics does not affect the end effector
      given threshold below its physical value, the system loses pas-   behavior. Moreover, when the Jacobian is close to a singularity,
        sivity [21], due to the presence of unavoidable structural com-   the generalized inverse can be robustly approximated using the
       pliance between the actuators and the interaction force. The  damped least squares pseudoinverse [27].
       passivity property is a sufﬁcient condition that guarantees cou-     In order to make the end effector able to follow and adapt
       pled stability in the presence of interaction with a generic pas-   to the force exerted by the operator at the tip, the end effector
       sive environment. This threshold holds also for natural admit-   dynamics can be set as a mass–damper system of
       tance control [22] which, with respect to impedance control,
                                                                Λd ¨x + Dd ˙x = F ext                   (4)
       allows reducing the effects of friction and unmodeled distur-
       bances, independently of inertia. On the other hand, theoretical  where Λd and Dd are suitable inertia and damping matrices,
      and experimental studies have shown that passivity may be too  which are positive deﬁnite and are usually set as constant diag-
       conservative and can be relaxed to improve performance [20],   onal matrices.
       [23], [24].                                             The above dynamics can be imposed to the closed loop con-
                                                                              trolled system by choosing F c in (2) as
                         III. CARTESIAN IMPEDANCE CONTROL          F c = η(q, ˙q) −Λ(q)Λ−1d Dd ˙x + (Λ(q)Λ−1d −I)F ext  (5)
       The KUKA LWR4 arm is a 7-DOF robot that can be torque or                                                                  with η(q, ˙q) = μ(q, ˙q)˙x + F g(q) + F f (q).
       velocity controlled; therefore, both impedance and admittance                                                                    This equation is a Cartesian impedance control law with null
       control can be used. The two control approaches have comple-                                                                               stiffness and null virtual position. If the apparent inertia of the
      mentary pros and cons, which have been well documented in                                                             end effector is left unchanged, i.e., Λd = Λ(q), the control law
       the literature (see, e.g., [25]). In this study, impedance control                                                                           (5) does not depend on the external force F ext. Conversely,
        is considered.                                                                       force feedback is required if inertia reshaping is desired. This is
       The dynamic model of the robot has the form                                                                        the price to pay to achieve the ideal behavior described by (4),
                                                            which is linear, decoupled, and independent of the robot con-       M(q)¨q + C(q, ˙q)˙q + g(q) + τ f = τ c + JT (q)F ext   (1)
                                                                       ﬁguration. On the other hand, if the natural inertia is preserved,
      where q ∈IRn, with n = 7, is the vector of joint variables,   a conﬁguration-dependent damping matrix should be adopted
    M(q) is the inertia matrix, C(q, ˙q)˙q is the vector of Cori-   to guarantee stability (see, e.g., [28]) leading to a nonlinear,
       olis/centrifugal torques, g(q)  is the vector of gravitational   coupled, and conﬁguration-dependent dynamics, which would
       torques, τ f is the vector of the friction torques, τ c is the con-  make more difﬁcult for the user to lead the end effector.
        trol torque, J(q) is the robot Jacobian, and τ ext = JT F ext is    The external force can be measured by using a force/torque
       the joint torque resulting from external force and torque F ext   sensor mounted at the end effector. Alternatively, force estima-
       applied to the end effector.                                        tion techniques can be adopted. An effective method, introduced
       The control strategy is designed to perform tasks in coop-   in [29], is based on the generalized momentum p(t) = M(q)˙q
       eration with humans. The operator interacts with the robot by   and the n-dimensional residual vector r deﬁned as
      moving the end effector along arbitrary trajectories. It is as-                                        t
     sumed that only forces can be applied. Hence, in (1), F ext is the         r(t) = KI     (τ c −g(q) + r(σ))dσ −p(t)      (6)
       (3 × 1) vector of external forces and J(q) is the (3 × 7) Jaco-                            0
       bian relating the joint velocities to the end effector translational   with r(0) = 0 and KI a diagonal positive matrix. These quan-
       velocity.                                                                       tities can be computed using measured signals q,  ˙q and the
       To design the impedance control, it is useful to derive the end   control torque τ c. It can be shown that
       effector dynamics in the operational space [26], considering                                                                         r ≈τ ext −τ δ                      (7)
      only the translational motion
                                                                  with τ δ = C(q, ˙q)˙q + τ f . Hence, left multiplying both sides
         Λ(q)¨x + μ(q, ˙q)˙x + F g(q) + F f (q) = F c + F ext    (2)   of the above equation by J†T yields
      where x ∈IR3 is the Cartesian position vector of the end ef-              J†T r ≈J†T τ ext −J†T τ δ ≈F ext
        fector, Λ = (JM −1JT )−1  is the (3 × 3) end effector iner-
                                                            where the contribution of friction torques and Coriolis and cen-
        tia matrix, hereafter denoted as apparent inertia, while μ˙x =
                                                                                trifugal effects reﬂected at the end effector has been considered    Λ(JM −1C −˙J)˙q, F g = J†T g, F f = J†T τ f  and F c =
                                                                         negligible with respect to the external force. Therefore, vector      J†T τ c are the forces, reﬂected at the end effector, corresponding
       to the noninertial joint torques in (1).                               F ext = J†T r                      (8)


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
      FICUCIELLO et al.: VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL OF REDUNDANT MANIPULATORS                                                                853


       is an estimate of the external force.                               capability of the robot to move the end effector along the Carte-
        In view of the above approximations, the control law that   sian directions, with a given set of unit norm joints velocities.
     imposes the impedance dynamics (4) can be implemented in the   Hence, in a joint conﬁguration where this index is (locally)
       joint space in the form                                     maximized, it is possible to produce end effector velocities in
                                                                                      all possible directions with (locally) minimal joint velocities.
      τ imp = −JT Λ[˙J ˙q + Λ−1d (Dd ˙x − F ext)] + g(q) −r.  (9)                                                                        In theory, instead of trying to make the ellipsoid as similar
                                                                     as possible to a sphere, it could be useful to shape it so that
                      IV. REDUNDANCY RESOLUTION
                                                                       the principal axis are always suitably aligned to the signiﬁcant
        In the presence of redundant DOFs, which is the case con-   directions of the task. However, the continuous changes of di-
      sidered here, it is possible to assign a secondary task in the null   rection imposed by the human to the end effector may produce
     space of the end effector task, by using the control law [26]      continuous internal motions of the robot that can have undesired
                                                                            effects (e.g., collisions or fast reconﬁgurations that are unsafe              τ c = τ imp + (I −JT J†T )(u −kD ˙q)       (10)
                                                                          for the human operator). Therefore, this solution, after some
     where −kD ˙q, with kD > 0, is a suitable damping torque, and    tests, was discarded.
    u is a torque control input to be designed, corresponding to a     Another possibility of exploiting redundancy is that of try-
     secondary task, which is projected in the null space of the main   ing to optimize in some way the mapping between the forces
      task through the matrix I −JT J†T .                            applied to the end effector and the corresponding velocities
      As observed in [30], control law (10) is able to ensure stability   or accelerations. As a matter of fact, in ideal conditions, the
      in practice both for the end effector task and in the null space. A   Cartesian impedance control law (5) allows cancelling out the
      rigorous stability proof would require a more complex formula-   robot dynamics as well as making the end effector dynamics
      tion of the null space terms, as those presented in [31] and [32]   completely independent of the joint conﬁguration. On the other
     and generalized in [33] to the case of an arbitrary hierarchy of   hand, it has been proven both theoretically and experimentally
      null space tasks.                                                         that, during interaction, instability is likely to occur when the
        In our application, the human guidance of the end effector   controller attempts to impose to the robot a dynamic behavior
      involves only the position, which is made compliant by the   that differs signiﬁcantly from the intrinsic hardware dynamics
      Cartesian impedance control under the action of the external   (in particular, lower than the natural robot impedance). Hence,
      forces. Thus, there are four of the seven DOFs of the robot at   the idea pursued here is that of using redundancy to make the
      disposal for the secondary task.                                 robot apparent dynamics at the end effector, described by (2),
       Moreover, in the task considered in this paper, i.e., writing on   as close as possible to the desired dynamics (4).
     a planar surface, the pen should point always toward the surface.    The most critical element in (2) is the equivalent inertia, which
     For this reason, among the possible redundancy resolution cri-    is conﬁguration dependent. This means that, at any given end
       teria, we have selected those that are less inﬂuenced by the end   effector position, the internal motion allowed by redundancy
      effector orientation, at least in region of the workspace where the   could be exploited to achieve robot’s conﬁgurations with de-
     main task is executed. This feature was also veriﬁed experimen-   sired inertial properties. Of course, this can be done only within
       tally. Another possibility would have been that of controlling   certain limits, depending on the robot kinematic structure and
      also the orientation to a desired value, or to make the end ef-  on the mass distribution. What it is reasonable, for example, is to
      fector compliant under the action of the external torques. In this   choose joint conﬁgurations with maximally decoupled inertia.
      case, however, a robot with a large number of DOFs (larger than  As in [3], this is achieved by using a secondary task function
      7) would be required to usefully exploit the redundancy.          inspired to the dynamic conditioning index (DCI) introduced in
        Different criteria can be pursued in order to choose the sec-   [35] to measure the dynamic isotropy of robot manipulators in
     ondary task.                                                           joint space.
      One simple criterion can be that of keeping the robot as far as     In the Cartesian space, the DC index (DCI) can be deﬁned
      possible from kinematic singularities. This can be achieved,   as the least-squares difference between the generalized inertia
       e.g., by maximizing  the  kinematic  manipulability  index,   matrix and a diagonal matrix as
     deﬁned as
                                                                               1
                   m(q) =   det(JJT )                (11)                 ω(q) = 2ET (q)W E(q)              (14)
        i.e., by choosing u in (10) as
                                                           where W is a diagonal weighting matrix, and the error vector
                          ∂m(q)  T                  E(q) is deﬁned as
                u = km                             (12)
                            ∂q
                                                          ⎡           ⎤
                                                                                       λ11(q) −σ(q)     where the elements of the gradient of the manipulability index
     can be computed as [34]                                                            λ22(q) −σ(q)
               ∂m(q)           ∂J                                             λ33(q) −σ(q)
               = m(q)trace    J†   .           (13)              E(q) =                                 (15)
                      ∂qi                 ∂qi                                                λ12(q)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣    λ13(q)                                   ⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦     Notice that the manipulability index is proportional to the area
      of the velocity manipulability ellipsoid, which represents the                              λ23(q)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
        854                                                                             IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 4, AUGUST 2015


      with being λij the generic element of the inertia matrix Λ and
     σ deﬁned as
                            1
                      σ(q) = 3trace(Λ(q)).               (16)
     The minimization of ω(q) results in a minimization of the el-
      ements’ norm of E, which corresponds to (a local) maximally
       diagonal inertia.
       The weighting matrix W has been chosen in order to give
       priority to the minimization of the norm of the off-diagonal
      elements of Λ(q), e.g.,

          W = diag{I3, μI3}                (17)

      with μ > 1 and I3 denoting the (3 × 3) identity matrix.
          Finally, the control input u in (14) is chosen as

                              ∂ω(q)  T
                u = −kc                            (18)
                             ∂q

      with kc > 0.

                          V. STABILITY REGION
                                                                                            Fig.  1.  Robot KUKA LWR4  in  the conﬁguration chosen  for  stability
     A suitable procedure has been set up to ﬁnd the allowed range    evaluation.
       of variation of the impedance parameters of (4) so that stability
        is preserved.                                                  worst-case conﬁguration for scaling (reducing) the end effector
       The stability region in the impedance parameters space could   inertia.
      be estimated analytically (see, e.g., [24]). However, many au-     Indeed, if a desired isotropic Cartesian inertia is imposed,
       thors have observed that the actual bounds of the stability region   the dynamics along the vertical direction is the most critical for
       are dependent on the robot’s hardware and, in the case of in-    stability, being the direction where the ratio between the desired
       teraction with a human operator, also on the impedance of the  and actual mass is the lowest, also in a neighborhood of the joint
     human arm, which cannot be accurately modeled and evaluated   conﬁguration q0. This means that the stability bounds for the
       [19], [20]. A further complication here is represented by the   parameters along the vertical direction are the most conservative
       null-space stability for the presence of redundant DOFs [30].  and ensure stability also along the other directions, as well as in
       Therefore, in this study, the stability region has been found   the surrounding conﬁgurations.
       experimentally.                                         The value of the inertia matrix in q0 and the corresponding
         In the scalar case, (4) can be rewritten in the Laplace   vector of eigenvalues are
      domain as                                             ⎡                  ⎤
                                                                                  0.1187   0.0006    0.0226
                             1   1
                  V (s) =         F(s)               (19)          Λ(q0) = ⎣ 0.0006   0.3069   −0.1395 ⎦
                 D 1 + sT                                                                                  0.0226  −0.1395   4.2405
      where V and F are the Laplace transforms of the velocity and
       force, respectively, and T = λ/D is the time constant of the
                                                                        λ(q0) = [0.1186  0.3020  4.2456 ]T .      system, where λ and D represent the inertia and damping along
      a generic Cartesian direction, respectively. Hence,  it can be    To reduce the number of parameters, the same damping and
      argued that the lower the damping, the higher the steady-state   the same mass has been set along all the directions of the Carte-
       velocity for a given constant input force; moreover, for a given   sian space, i.e., Dd = DI and Λd = λI, with λ = α¯λ, being
      damping, the lower the inertia, the higher the bandwidth of the    ¯λ = 4.2456 kg the maximum eigenvalue and 0 < α ≤1 a scal-
      system or, equivalently, the lower the time constant T.           ing factor. This way, the desired impedance behavior will be
        For the stability test, the joint vector                    made isotropic by decreasing the mass along the vertical direc-
                                                                           tion and increasing those along the other two Cartesian direc-
                q0 = [0  0  0  −90  0  −45  0]T
                                                                                tions, which, therefore, are not critical for stability.
      corresponding to the robot conﬁguration represented in Fig. 1,    The stability region has been evaluated experimentally by
      has been selected. One reason for this choice is that, in this   setting a value of damping D in the interval [5, 60] Ns/m and
       conﬁguration, the end effector inertia matrix is almost diagonal.   reducing the value of α, starting from α = 1, until vibrations
      Another reason is that, in this conﬁguration, one of the eigenval-   can be felt by an operator shaking the end effector in a neighbor-
      ues of the inertia matrix (that corresponding to the vertical axis)  hood of the initial conﬁguration. In order to have results inde-
      assumes a value ¯λ close to the maximum one, in the portion of   pendent of the stiffness of the speciﬁc subject, the end effector
       the robot workspace where the task is executed. Hence, q0 is a    is shaken so as to produce large variations of the stiffness of the


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
      FICUCIELLO et al.: VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL OF REDUNDANT MANIPULATORS                                                                855


                                                                          in order to accommodate the human movement during physical
                                                                            interaction. According to the related results available in the lit-
                                                                         erature [6], [15], [19], high impedance parameters are desired
                                                     when the operator performs ﬁne movements at low velocity,
                                                                 while lower values of the parameters should be used for large
                                                         movements at high velocity. The human perception is mainly in-
                                                            ﬂuenced by the damping parameter, while, for a given damping,
                                                                       the desired (virtual) mass is crucial for stability.
                                                                       Therefore, our idea is that of varying the damping according
                                                                          to the absolute value of the end effector Cartesian velocity in
        Fig. 2.  Range of minimum and maximum allowed damping D for a given   order to improve the performance in terms of execution time
       scaling factor α of the inertia matrix.                              and accuracy. Namely, when the velocity is high, the damping
                                                                      force is reduced so that the operator can move the end effector
                                                                 with minimum effort and the execution time can be reduced;
                                                                     vice versa, at low velocity, the damping force is increased to
                                                             improve accuracy. On the other hand, the virtual mass is set so
                                                                     as the parameters of the system remain in the stability region.
                                                        To this purpose, the stability region in the parameter space has
                                                             been evaluated experimentally (see Section V) for any damping
                                                                          in the interval [5, 60] N · s/m.
                                                         The relationships used to vary the damping for each of the
                                                                     Cartesian principal directions is

                                                          D(˙x) = min{a e−b|˙x|, 5}              (20)        Fig. 3.   Stability region: time constant T versus damping D.
                                                           where a = 60 and b = 4. These parameters have been chosen
    human arm. The amplitude of the interval for the damping coef-   in order to have a variation of the damping within the interval
      ﬁcient has been set on the basis of experiments where the natural   [5, 60] N · s/m for the possible range of velocities in the con-
      robot’s inertia was not modiﬁed.                                 sidered task. A saturation to the minimum value of 5 N · s/m is
       The results of the experimental procedure are reported in   introduced in case of high velocity.
      Fig. 2, where the stability region for the parameters D and α     For the mass (or, equivalently, for the time constant T), dif-
       is that included between the continuous and the dotted line. It   ferent choices have been considered and tested, namely:
     can be observed that any value of damping in the interval [5, 60]     L1: constant mass, with low value (close to the minimum
     can be chosen provided that α > 0.25, while, for α < 0.25 the          value within the stability region), i.e. λ = 1.1 kg.
     lower and upper bounds of the allowed damping come closer.     L2: constant mass, with high value, i.e. λ = 5.6 kg.
     For α < 0.1, the robot starts vibrating for any value of damping.     L3: constant T, set as the minimum value within the stability
      An alternative representation is reported in Fig. 3, where          region for any damping D.
      the stability region is parameterized with respect to the time     L4: minimum (variable) T within the stability region for any
      constant T of the impedance (19) and to the damping D. In this        damping D.
      ﬁgure, also the geometric locus with minimum constant mass     In the latter case, the time constant T is computed as
     (λ = 0.764 kg) contained in the stability region is represented.                    λf
                                                           T =    (a + b arctan(c(D −d)))
     This curve can be taken as a rough analytic expression of the               Df
      frontier of the stability region, i.e., stability is preserved for any
                                                           where  the  default damping value Df = 30 N  · s/m has     choice of the impedance parameters in the region on the right
                                                             been chosen as an intermediate value between the minimum      of this curve.
                                                                     (5 N · s/m) and the maximum (60 N · s/m) values used in the           It is worth observing that, since the end effector dynamics is
                                                                   experiments. The default mass value λf = 3 kg and the constant      not homogenous along the three Cartesian directions, it would
                                                                    values a = 1.1820, b = 0.60, c = 0.4, d = 20 have been set in     be signiﬁcant to choose different impedance parameters along
                                                                    order to have the minimum allowed T preserving stability.      these directions. Therefore, a different stability region in the
                                                         The geometric loci in the parameters space corresponding to     parameters space could be deﬁned for each Cartesian direction.
                                                                       the above choices are represented in Fig. 4. Notice that the dot-      Actually, the three stability regions have been found experimen-
                                                              dashed line (minimum T curve) can be also taken as the frontier       tally (see Fig. 9), using the same procedure described above, and
                                                                     of the stability region in the parameter space, which, for values      will be used in Section VII.
                                                                     of the damping D lower than 10 N · s/m, is less conservative than
                                                                       the geometric locus of Fig. 3 (minimum constant mass curve).
                      VI. VARIABLE IMPEDANCE
                                         A rigorous theoretical justiﬁcation of the above choices is not
       The goal of a variable impedance strategy for a comanipula-   easy, but some hints can be derived by considering the posi-
      tion task is to vary the damping and mass properties of the robot   tion control scheme of Fig. 5 modeling the physical interaction


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
        856                                                                             IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 4, AUGUST 2015





         Fig. 4.   Representation of the four variation laws of time constant T with
         respect to damping D.





         Fig. 5.  Block diagram representing the human–robot physical interaction.


                                                                                            Fig. 6.  Time history of the force (top) and velocity (bottom) in the case of
                                                                          low mass (λ = 1.1 kg) and variable damping, compared with the case of low
      between the human arm and the robot’s tip along a single Carte-                                                               (D = 5 N · s/m) and high (D = 60 N · s/m) constant damping.
       sian direction. In that scheme, the human arm driving the end
       effector through the force f is modeled as a pure stiffness k, con-
                                                          damping is quite close to that obtained in the case of minimum
       sidering that the stiffness is the dominant effect of the impedance
                                                              damping. For low velocity, the proﬁle is closer to that in the case
       of the human arm (see, e.g., [7] and [8]), namely:
                                                                      of maximum damping.
                         f = k(xd −x).                                      It is worth noticing that, when constant minimum damping is
                                                                      used, the velocity almost matches the desired one (not reported
     The value k = 200 N/m, corresponding to an intermediate value
                                                                           in the ﬁgure); however, when the velocity decreases to zero,
       of the arm stiffness during a writing task, has been considered
                                                                  both the force and the velocity are oscillating and change sign.
       in the simulations.
                                                                  This undesirable behavior is emphasized when the mass is set
         In view of (4), the dynamics of the end effector, in case
                                                                           to the maximum value, as shown in Fig. 7, but is not present in
       of variable damping and mass, is represented by the nonlinear
                                                                        the other cases where, although the force is higher than in the
       equation
                                                                    case of minimum damping, both force and velocity go to zero
                        λ(˙x)¨x + D(˙x)˙x = f                     smoothly and without oscillations.
                                                                         In can be argued that, with respect to the velocity and force
      where the damping D is deﬁned in (20) and the mass λ is set
                                                                        proﬁles, the use of variable damping allows to reach a good
       constant in the cases L1 and L2 or as
                                                           compromise with respect to the cases of constant low and high
                          λ(˙x) = D(˙x)T                       damping.
                                                 On the other hand, when variable mass is used in addition
       in the cases L3 and L4.
                                                                           to variable damping, the simulation results show that the per-
       The position reference xd(t) is chosen according to a raised
                                                              formance do not change signiﬁcantly with respect to the case
       cosine time law with a duration of 4 s and a total displacement
                                                                      of constant mass. Slightly better results are obtained when the
       of 0.2 m.
                                                                              virtual mass is lower, i.e., in the case L4 better than in the
     A comparison of the performance obtained with the different
                                                                    case L3.
       choices of the parameters can be made by comparing the forces
                                                          The suggestions deriving from the above analysis are based
      f applied by the human to the robot’s tip and the resulting
                                                          on simpliﬁed assumptions, one for all, the hypothesis that the
        velocities.
                                                                               stiffness of the human arm remains constant during the task
         In Fig. 6, the scheme with variable damping is compared
                                                                       execution. For this reason, the experimental validation reported
      with the case of constant damping set to the minimum (D =
                                                                           in the next section is of crucial importance.
      5 N · s/m) and maximum (D = 60 N · s/m) values, respectively.
         It can be observed that the force required to move the end
                                                                                             VII. EXPERIMENTS       effector in the case of variable damping reaches intermediate
       values with respect to those required in the case of minimum     In the experiments, two fundamental aspects have been con-
      and maximum constant damping. On the other hand, when the   sidered, namely, the use of redundancy and the choice of the
       velocity is higher, the velocity proﬁle in the case of variable   variable impedance strategy.


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
      FICUCIELLO et al.: VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL OF REDUNDANT MANIPULATORS                                                                857





                                                                                           Fig. 8.   Snapshot of the comanipulation task.


                                                                   A. Redundancy Versus Stability

                                                   Two different secondary tasks have been tested for redun-
                                                             dancy resolution: the maximization of the kinematic manipula-
                                                                                  bility index (11) and the minimization of the DCI (14).
                                                                    Here, the comparison is carried out by checking the stabil-
                                                                                  ity of the Cartesian impedance control law, i.e., verifying that
                                                                       the system remains stable during task execution, when variable
        Fig. 7.  Time history of the force (top) and velocity (bottom) in the case of  impedance control is applied. A snapshot of the comanipulation
       high mass (λ = 5.6 kg) and variable damping, compared with the case of low   task is reported in Fig. 8; the complete video sequence can be
     (D = 5 N · s/m) and high (D = 60 N · s/m) constant damping.
                                                              found in the accompany video.
                                                                        In Section V, a conservative stability region in the param-
     A case study has been selected, consisting in the execution of   eter space has been found, assuming that the same damping
     a writing task on a horizontal plane operated by a human: the  and mass parameters are set along all the Cartesian direc-
      operator guides a paint marker mounted on the robot’s tip along   tions. A more accurate estimation of the stability region can be
     a path drawn on a paper sheet.                                 found, by using the same experimental procedure described in
       The orientation was not considered in our case study; other-   Section V, but allowing the choice of different values of the
      wise, we will not have signiﬁcant redundant DOFs that can be   parameters along the three Cartesian directions.
     used for the secondary task. Moreover, the aim of our work is    The stability regions for the three Cartesian directions of the
      to check the value of the proposed approach for a generic task  end effector, referred to the base frame, are shown in Fig. 9. In the
      of comanipulation requiring only Cartesian position control.     same ﬁgure, two sets of curves are represented, corresponding
       The path has been designed with the aim of inducing trajecto-   to constant mass (or inertia) loci. The continuous curves, with
       ries with variable velocity and is composed of long straight-line   constant virtual inertia Λd = diag{0.0328, 0.0548, 0.8138} kg,
     segments, sharp corners, and smooth circular arcs (see Fig. 10,   are close  to the  instability  frontiers and can be assumed
     dot-dashed lines).                                              as minimal inertia curves. The dashed curves, with Λd =
       The initial conﬁguration of the robot has been chosen to facil-   diag{0.0492, 0.0822, 1.2207} kg, are safely within the stability
       itate the execution of the writing task planned on the horizontal   regions. The experiments have been performed using a vari-
      plane, namely                                                  able damping impedance control law, with parameters varying
                                                          on the above curves, namely, constant inertia and damping set
        qi = [2.35  22.8  −1.54  −53.2  −3.1  101.15  0]T     according to (20).
                                                  When the DCI is used for redundancy resolution, the task
     with inertia matrix                                           has been completed in both cases, as it is shown in Fig. 10,
                                                           where the paths of the paint marker are represented, together               ⎡                   ⎤
                        0.1265   −0.0042   0.1470             with the reference path, when low and high values of virtual
            Λ(qi) = ⎣ −0.0042   0.2002   −0.0661 ⎦             inertia are used, respectively. On the other hand, in the case of
                        0.1470   −0.0661   2.9396            low inertia (Fig. 10, top), the task cannot be completed when the
                                                                     manipulability index (Man) is used for redundancy resolution,
     and eigenvalues                                            because the system tends to become unstable. The accuracy
                                                                     of the path and the time to complete the task have not been
                λ(qi) = (0.1188  0.1986  2.9489 )T               evaluated at this stage.
                                                         The corresponding time histories of the DCI during the ex-
     where the joint angles are in degrees.                           ecution of the experiment are reported in Fig. 11. Notice that


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
        858                                                                             IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 4, AUGUST 2015





         Fig. 9.   Stability regions and constant mass curves for the three Cartesian
         directions.


                                                                                            Fig. 10.   Reference and actual paths for the writing task in the case of low
                                                                                              (top) and high (bottom) virtual inertia.
       the values of the DCI are always lower when the minimization
       of the DCI is used as secondary task, as expected, with some
       exceptions in correspondence of abrupt changes of directions.
      Moreover, in the case of low inertia, the system tends to become
       unstable when the value of the DCI is too high, i.e., when the
        inertia of the robot at the end effector deviates signiﬁcantly from
       the desired diagonal inertia imposed by the control.


       B. Redundancy Versus Performance

       To evaluate the performance related to redundancy resolution,
       the methods have been compared using two different impedance
       laws, one with constant parameters (set as λ = 1.1 kg, D =
      60 N · s/m) and one with variable damping (low constant mass,
     λ = 1.1 kg, of Fig. 4).
         Since the objective is to compare the redundancy resolution
        strategies, a generic choice for the impedance parameters is
     made by setting them uniformly in all the directions. Moreover,
       as described in the previous Section VII-A, when redundancy is
      used to optimize the manipulability, a more conservative choice
       for the impedance parameters is needed, since the stability limits
       in the three Cartesian directions found experimentally in the
      neighborhood of the initial conﬁguration (see Fig. 6) are not
       satisﬁed throughout the drawn path.                                      Fig. 11.  Time histories of the values of DCI in the case of low (top) and
         Since the assigned task consists in pursuing a given path, a   high (bottom) virtual inertia. The continuous lines represent the DCI when
                                                                               redundancy is used to increase manipulability. The dashed lines represent the
       signiﬁcant measure of performance is the error between the ref-   DCI when redundancy is used to minimize the DCI.
      erence and the actual path, which can be deﬁned in different
      ways. A very simple measure is the absolute value of the differ-


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
      FICUCIELLO et al.: VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL OF REDUNDANT MANIPULATORS                                                                859



                           TABLE I
                       t-TEST RESULTS ON THE DATA OF FIG. 15



                                var vr hconst     var vr lconst    hconst vr lconst

                              h =1          h = 0          h = 0
                     time      var<hconst     −         −
                                (p = 0.0062)    (p = 0.8888)     (p = 0.4503)
                              h = 0         h = 1          h = 1
                      length     −          var<lconst     hconst<lconst
                                (p = 0.9739)    (p = 0.0094)     (p = 0.0313)


                                                                                           Fig. 12.   Values of the length error e and execution time H in the experiments
     ence between the length of the path drawn in cooperation with   on ﬁve subjects using variable and low constant impedance; both manipulability
      the robot, le, and the ideal path length, ld, namely the length   index and DCI optimization are used as secondary tasks. The bigger markers
      error                                                                           are the mean values on the ﬁve different subjects.

                          e = |ld −le|.                    (21)

    We have also tested more accurate measures, as the area of the
      region between the ideal and the actual path, or the difference
     between the centroid of the reference and actual ﬁgure. For the
     purpose of our experiments, however, the measure (21) provided
      satisfactory results.
       Another performance parameter is the execution time H of
      the trajectory, deﬁned as the difference between the time when
      the entire path is completed and the time when the drawing tool
     touches the paper on the desk to start writing.
        In order to obtain quantities that overcome the skills of the    Fig. 13.   Values of length error e and execution time H in the experiments on
                                                                                          three subjects using DCI optimization and the four variable impedance laws of
      singular operator, the above parameters are evaluated as the    Fig. 4. The bigger markers are the mean values on the three different subjects.
     average on the performance of more subjects.
       The tests have been carried out on ﬁve different subjects
                                                                     able impedance control even though the use of variable param-      that move the robot using their dominant hand. We found that
                                                                            eters reduces the error on the path in spite of the strategy used      the number of subjects used in the experiments is sufﬁcient
                                                                          to solve the redundancy.     on the basis of the analysis of the results. Indeed, the results
                                                                     Last but not least, all the subjects involved in the experiments      of the comparison between the variable and constant (low and
                                                              have conﬁrmed that the “feeling” of the manual guidance (in      high) impedance are statistically signiﬁcant as shown in Table I
                                                                 terms of intuitiveness and response of the robot) improves when      reported at the end of this section.
                                                                       the DCI is adopted, i.e., when redundancy is used to decouple       Each subject has been trained in advance, by executing the
                                                                       the natural end effector dynamics along the principal directions      task with the different strategies to be tested, in order to become
                                                                     of the task.      familiar with the task and the robot. At the end of the train-
      ing phase, all the subjects were able to complete the task in a
      reasonable time (under 30 s) with all the control strategies. In   C. Evaluation of Variable Impedance Laws
      addition, during the training phase, each subject was asked to                                                                        In this set of experiments, the DCI is adopted for redun-
     look for the conﬁguration, which resulted the most comfortable,                                                             dancy resolution, and the performance of the different variable
      as well as for the best ﬁtting starting point of the path, without                                                            impedance laws, presented in Section VI, is evaluated. The same
     any kind of conditioning.                                                                       task described in the previous sections has been executed by
       The subjects were told to perform the path taking into account                                                                        three different subjects.
      the accuracy as a primary objective and the execution time as a                                                         The results, reported in Fig. 13, show that the lower error
     secondary objective. In addition, during both the training phase                                                                 along the path with the smaller execution time is achieved when
     and the actual testing phase, the subjects have not been informed                                                                       the virtual mass of the end effector is kept constant, to the
     on the features of each control law, nor even which one of the                                                    minimum value compatible with stability, namely, the law L1
      four strategies they were performing.                                                                       (see also Fig. 4).
       The results of the tests are reported in Fig. 12, where the
      error on the length of the path e versus the execution time H is
                                                           D. Variable Versus Constant Impedance
      reported for all the subjects, as well as their mean values.
           It can be observed that, for the impedance control with con-    The variable impedance control L1 has been compared with
      stant parameters, the use of DCI ensures better performance  two different sets of constant impedance gains (chosen along
      than the use of manipulability index (Man) both in terms of   the curve), namely: high damping (λ = 1.1 kg, D = 60 N · s/m)
      execution time and error on the path. This is true also for vari-  and low damping (λ = 1.1 kg, D = 20 N · s/m). These values


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
        860                                                                             IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 4, AUGUST 2015





         Fig. 14.  Time history of the variable damping D during the execution of the
         task with the variable impedance control L1 for one subject.
                                                                                            Fig. 16.  Norm and mean value of the contact forces for high, variable, and
                                                                          low damping, for one subject.


                                                                        the operator effort requested for the manual guidance. Indeed,
                                                            from Fig. 16, it can be veriﬁed that higher damping requires
                                                                     higher forces to be exerted to the end effector. On the contrary,
                                                             impedance with low damping allows the task to be performed
                                                         more easily, with less effort and time, but with less accuracy.
                                                          The most relevant result of Table  I  is that the variable
                                                             impedance (var) guarantees the best performance for accuracy,
                                                                    execution time, and effort of the operator (see also Figs. 15
                                                             and 16). Indeed, it can be seen that the improvement of vari-
                                                                      able impedance (var) with respect to high constant damping
         Fig. 15.   Values of length error e and execution time H in the experiments on   (hconst) in terms of execution time is statistically signiﬁcant;
       ﬁve subjects using DCI optimization, with the variable impedance control L1  on the contrary, it is not possible to detect an edge over the accu-
       and two different sets of constant parameters. The bigger markers are the mean
                                                                             racy. From the comparison between the low constant damping        values on the ﬁve different subjects.
                                                                             (lconst) and variable impedance parameters (var), it emerges
                                                                              that the advantage of the variable strategy is relevant and statis-
      correspond to the average maximum and minimum damping   tically signiﬁcant in terms of accuracy, while the difference in
      recorded in the previous set of experiments with constant mass   terms of execution time is irrelevant.
      and variable damping.                                        For the sake of completeness, the results of the comparison
       The time history of the damping variation along the three   between high and low constant damping parameters have also
       Cartesian directions for a single test is reported in Fig. 14. The   been reported. By observing Fig. 15 and Table I, the advantage of
      aim of this test is that of evaluating what is resulted as the best   using high damping parameters for accuracy appears clear and
       variable impedance control law for the considered task, with two   statistically signiﬁcant. The execution time improves when low
       different choices of constant damping values: high damping (to  damping is adopted since the robot become lighter and easier
       privilege accuracy) and low damping (to privilege execution   to move (see Fig. 16). However, the result on the execution
       speed).                                                     time is not statistically signiﬁcant: This is probably because the
       The results, carried out on ﬁve different subjects, are shown   subjects were instructed to prefer accuracy over speed during
       in Fig. 15, where the execution time H and the error on the   the execution of the task, which has led to a higher dispersion
       length of the path are reported. In order to assess whether the   of the data related to execution time.
       difference between the mean values on the set of data reported
       in Fig. 15 is statistically signiﬁcant, a t-test has been performed
                                                                                                 VIII. DISCUSSION       [36]. The results, reported in Table I, can be interpreted as fol-
       lows. If the variable h is 1 (0), then the two compared means     During physical human–robot interaction, the most natural
       are (not) signiﬁcantly different with conﬁdence p ∈[0, 1]; the  way to control the robot is through an impedance strategy tuned
      lower the value of p, the more statistically signiﬁcant the differ-   to the task requirements. Redundancy can be exploited as well
      ence between the mean values of the two sets of data. Moreover,   to improve stability and performance. The research presented
       Fig. 16 represents the norm of the linear forces exerted at the tip,   in this study branches off along these two complementary lines,
       for one subject, in the case of high, low and variable impedance.   both pointing toward the improvement of the physical human–
     The horizontal dashed lines are the corresponding mean values   robot interaction in terms of intuitiveness and stability during
      computed during the execution of the task.                       the execution of comanipulation tasks.
        Looking at Table I, the constant impedance with high damping     In the ﬁrst instance, different strategies to solve redundancy
       (hconst) ensures higher accuracy with respect to the constant   are evaluated among the solutions that are compatible with the
      impedance with low damping (lconst), as expected. This result,  main task. The comparison has been made in terms of stability
      however, comes at the expenses of the execution time and of  and performance (i.e., length error e and execution time H). The


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
      FICUCIELLO et al.: VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL OF REDUNDANT MANIPULATORS                                                                861


                                                                    ing based on acceleration can be interpreted as a nonlinear lead
                                                              compensation based on the intention of the user to increase or de-
                                                                     crease the velocity, which enhances the reactivity of the system,
                                                                          resulting in a higher equivalent bandwidth. This may explain
                                                  why this kind of modulation is effective on the robotic platform
                                                               used in [15], based on a heavy industrial robot with moving
                                                             masses ranging from 100 to 500 kg and low equivalent band-
                                                                    width, and not helpful in our platform, based on a lightweight
                                        KUKA robot with a larger equivalent bandwidth, where it causes
                                                             an overreaction. In any case, a theoretical analysis supporting
                                                                       the choice of the modulation laws of the impedance parameters,
                                                           which takes into account the nonlinear and coupled dynamics
                                                                     of robot and human arm, is still missing.
                                                                Another important issue is that our study does not include a
                                                                     rigorous stability proof, for both ﬁxed and variable impedance
        Fig. 17.   Conceptual path followed for the experimental investigations. The
       solutions with the best results in terms of performance (i.e., length error e and   parameters. As a matter of fact, although the experimental re-
       execution time H) and stability are highlighted using different colours.          sults provide signiﬁcant and useful guidelines, these cannot be
                                                                          easily generalized to any kind of robot and task.


                                                                                       IX. CONCLUSION

                                                                        In this paper, the problem of Cartesian impedance control of a
                                                                 redundant robot arm executing a cooperative task with a human
                                                                 has been addressed. In particular, redundancy has been used to
                                                             keep robot’s natural behavior as close as possible to the desired
                                                            impedance behavior, by decoupling the end effector equivalent
        Fig. 18.   Results obtained with different combination of redundancy resolution
      and impedance strategies presented on the basis of the performance level in   inertia. This allows easily ﬁnding a region in the impedance
       increasing order from left to right.                                   parameter space where stability is preserved. Extensive exper-
                                                                   imental tests conﬁrmed that this solution leads to improving
                                                               performance in the execution of a cooperative writing task with
     experiments showed that the best way to solve redundancy in
                                                                       respect to the use of other options for redundancy resolution,
     comanipulation tasks is that of keeping the end effector apparent
                                                                                     e.g., the maximization of the manipulability index.
       inertia as close as possible to that imposed by the impedance
                                                                 Moreover, different variable impedance strategies, where the
      control, i.e., at least diagonal. This allows a wider range of
                                                                  parameters are modiﬁed on the basis of the interpretation of
      selection of the impedance parameters that preserve stability
                                                     human intentions, have been evaluated in a simulation study
     and improves the performance (see Sections VII-A and VII-B).
                                                            and tested on the experimental setup. The variable impedance
        In parallel, the experimental evaluation of different modula-
                                                                         strategy ensuring the best performance has been selected and
      tion strategies of the impedance parameters has been carried out.
                                                          compared with two different sets of constant impedance gains,
     The best solution for a lightweight robot consists on linking the
                                                                                                  i.e., high damping (to privilege accuracy) and low damping (to
     damping variation directly to the Cartesian velocity, as previ-
                                                                          privilege execution speed).
      ously discussed. The performance is improved when the virtual
                                                         The experimental results show that the combination of vari-
      equivalent mass at the end effector is kept as low as possible,
                                                                     able impedance and redundancy resolution with inertia decou-
     compatibly with the stability (see Fig. 13).
                                                                      pling ensures the best tradeoff between accuracy and execution
        In Fig. 17, a graphical representation of the conceptual path
                                                                       time.
     followed in our investigation is reported. It can be seen that
      the best solution in terms of stability and performance is that
                                                                             REFERENCES     achieved using variable damping and constant virtual mass, set
      to the minimum value compatible with the stability. The compar-     [1] N. Hogan, “Impedance control: An approach to manipulation: Part I the-
      ison between variable and constant impedance using different         ory; Part II implementation; Part III applications,” J. Dyn. Sys., Meas.,
                                                                                            Control, vol. 107, no. 12, pp. 1–24, 1985.
     redundancy resolution strategies is summarized in Fig. 18. It     [2] H. Sadeghian, L. Villani, M. Keshmiri, and B. Siciliano, “Task-space
     can be seen that the performance improves from left to right.            control of robot manipulators with null-space compliance,” IEEE Trans.
     A number of issues remain open. First of all, we have adopted         Robot., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 493–506, Apr. 2014.
                                                                                              [3]  F.  Ficuciello, A. Romano, L.  Villani, and B.  Siciliano, “Cartesian
     a damping variation law (20) that is the result of an extensive        impedance  control  of redundant manipulators  for human-robot co-
     experimental campaign. In the experiments, we have also tested         manipulation,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Chicago,
      the adaptation law presented in [15], where the damping is var-          IL, USA, 2014, pp. 2120–2125.
                                                                                              [4] B. Vanderborght, A. Albu-Schaeffer, A. Bicchi, E. Burdet, D. Caldwell,
      ied according to the acceleration, with worse results, because        R. Carloni, M. Catalano, O. Eiberger, W. Friedl, G. Ganesh, M. Gara-
      the system was too responsive. The modulation of the damp-           bini, M. Grebenstein, G. Grioli, S. Haddadin, H. Hoppner, A. Jafari, M.



Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
        862                                                                             IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 4, AUGUST 2015



              Laffranchi, D. Lefeber, F. Petit, S. Stramigioli, N. Tsagarakis, M. V.    [26] O. Khatib, “A uniﬁed approach for motion and force control of robot
          Damme, R. V. Ham, L. Visser, and S. Wolf, “Variable impedance ac-         manipulators: The operational space formulation,” IEEE J. Robot. Autom.,
               tuators: A review,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 1601–1614,          vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1115–1120, Feb. 1987.
             2013.                                                                    [27] Y. Nakamura and H. Hanafusa, “Inverse kinematic solution with singular-
          [5] R. Ikeura and H. Inooka, “Variable impedance control of a robot for coop-           ity robustness for robot manipulator control,” ASME J. Dyn. Syst., Meas.
               eration with a human,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Nagoya,         Control, vol. 108, pp. 163–171, 1986.
              Aichi, Japan, 1995, pp. 3097–3102.                                        [28] C. Ott, Cartesian Impedance Control of Redundant and Flexible Joint
          [6] R. Ikeura, T. Moriguchi, and K. Mizutani, “Optimal variable impedance        Robots (Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics), vol. 49. New York, NY,
              control for a robot and its application to lifting an object with a human,”       USA: Springer, 2008.
               in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Human Interactive Commun., Berlin,    [29] A. D. Luca, A. Albu-Sch¨affer, S. Haddadin, and G. Hirzinger, “Colli-
            Germany, 2002, pp. 500–505.                                                  sion detection and safe reaction with the DLR-III lightweight robot arm,”
          [7]  T. Tsumugiwa, R. Yokogawa, and K. Hara, “Variable impedance control          in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Beijing, China, 2006,
             based on estimation of human arm stiffness for human-robot cooperative         pp. 1623–1630.
               calligraphic task,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Washington,    [30]  J. Nakanishi, R. Cory, M. J. Peters, and S. Schaal, “Operational space
           DC, USA, 2002, pp. 644–650.                                                      control: A theoretical and empirical comparison,” Int. J. Robot. Res.,
          [8] C. Mitsantisuk, K. Ohishi, and S. Katsura, “Variable mechanical stiffness          vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 737–757, 2008.
              control based on human stiffness estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.    [31] C. Natale, B. Siciliano, and L. Villani, “Spatial impedance control of
             Mechatronics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2011, pp. 731–736.                            redundant manipulators,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Detroit,
          [9] K. P. Tee, D. W. Franklin, M. Kawato, T. T. Milner, and E. Burdet,        MI, USA, 1999, pp. 1788–1793.
             “Concurrent adaptation of force and impedance in the redundant muscle    [32] H. Sadeghian, L. Villani, M. Keshmiri, and B. Siciliano, “Dynamic multi-
              system,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 102, no. 1, pp. 31–44, 2010.                            priority control in redundant robotic systems,” Robotica, vol. 31, no. 7,
        [10] E.  Burdet, R. Osu, D.  Franklin,  T.  E.  Milner, and M. Kawato,         pp. 1155–1167, 2013.
            “The central nervous system stabilizes unstable dynamics by learn-    [33] C. Dietrich, C. Ott, and A. Albu-Sch¨affer, “Multi-objective compliance
              ing optimal impedance,” Nature,  vol. 414, no. 6862, pp. 446–449,         control of redundant manipulators: Hierarchy, control, and stability,”
             2001.                                                                               in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Tokyo, Japan, 2013,
        [11] C. Yang, G. Ganesh, S. Haddadin, S. Parusel, A. Albu-Schaeffer, and         pp. 3043–3050.
             E. Burdet, “Human-like adaptation of force and impedance in stable and    [34]  J. Park, W. Chung, and Y. Youm, “Computation of gradient of manipu-
              unstable interactions,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 918–930,           lability for kinematically redundant manipulators including dual manipu-
             Apr. 2011.                                                                             lators system,” Trans. Control Autom. Syst. Eng., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 8–15,
        [12] M.  Howard,  D.  Braun,  and  S.  Vijayakumar,  “Transferring  hu-        1999.
          man impedance behavior  to heterogeneous  variable impedance  ac-    [35] O. Ma and J. Angeles, “The concept of dynamic isotropy and its appli-
                tuators,” IEEE  Trans.  Robot.,  vol.  29,  no.  4,  pp. 847–862, Aug.         cations to inverse kinematics and trajectory planning,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
             2013.                                                                       Conf. Robot. Autom., San Francisco, CA, USA, 1990, pp. 10–15.
        [13] K. Kronander and A. Billard, “Online learning of varying stiffness through    [36] M. Hazewinkel, Ed.,Encyclopedia of Mathematics. New York, USA:
              physical human-robot interaction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,         Springer-Verlag, 2001.
                St. Paul, MN, USA, 2012, pp. 1842–1849.
        [14] A. Ajoudani, N. Tsagarakis, and A. Bicchi, “Tele-impedance: Teleoper-
               ation with impedance regulation using a body-machine interface,” Int. J.
             Robot. Res., vol. 31, no. 13, pp. 1642–1656, 2012.
        [15] A. Lecours, B. Mayer-St-Onge, and C. Gosselin, “Variable admittance
              control of a four-degree-of-freedom intelligent assist device,” in Proc.
           IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Saint Paul, MN, USA, 2012, pp. 3903–
             3908.
        [16]  F. Ferraguti, C. Secchi, and C. Fantuzzi, “A tank-based approach to
            impedance control with variable stiffness,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
             Autom., Karlsruhe, Germany, 2014, pp. 4933–4938.
        [17]  S. Bowyer, B. Davies, and F. R. y Baena, “Active constraints/virtual
              ﬁxtures: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 138–157, Feb.
             2014.
        [18] C. A. Moore, M. A. Peshkin, and J. E. Colgate, “Cobot implementation
              of virtual paths and 3-d virtual surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 19,
              no. 2, pp. 347–351, Apr. 2003.
        [19] V. Duchaine, B. Mayer-St-Onge, D. Gao, and C. Gosselin, “Stable and
                intuitive control of an intelligent assist device,” IEEE Trans. Haptics, vol.
               5, no. 2, pp. 1939–1412, Apr–Jun. 2012.
        [20]  S. Buerger and N. Hogan, “Complementary stability and loop shaping for                      Fanny Ficuciello (M’11) was born in Nocera Infe-
            improved human-robot interaction,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 23, no. 2,                                  riore, Italy, on October 20, 1974. She received the
              pp. 232–244, Apr. 2007.                                                                    Laurea degree (magna cum laude) in mechanical
        [21]  J. Colgate and H. Hogan, “Robust control of dynamically interacting                            engineering in 2007 and the Ph.D. degree in com-
              systems,” Int. J. Control, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 65–88, 1988.                                             puter and automation engineering from University of
        [22] W. Newman, “Stability and performance limits of interaction controllers,”                          Naples Federico II, Napoli, Italy, in November 2010.
         ASME  J. Dyn.  Syst., Meas. Control, vol. 114, no. 4, pp. 563–570,                         From September to March 2010 she was a Vis-
             1992.                                                                                                          iting Scholar with the Control Engineering Group,
        [23]  S. Buerger and N. Hogan, “Relaxing passivity for human-robot interac-                             University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands,
                tion,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelli. Robots Syst., Beijing, China,                          under the supervision of Prof. S. Stramigioli. She is
             2006, pp. 4570–4575.                                                                         a Member of PRISMA (Projects of Industrial and
        [24] V. Duchaine and C. Gosselin, “Investigation of human-robot interaction    Service Robotics, Mechatronics and Automation) Research Group. She is cur-
                stability using Lyapunov theory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,    rently a Postdoctoral Researcher with University of Naples Fedeerico II. Her
             Pasadena, CA, USA, 2008, pp. 2189–2194.                                research interest is focused on robotics, in particular on safe physical human–
        [25] C. Ott, R. Mukherjee, and Y. Nakamura, “Uniﬁed impedance and admit-    robot interaction, force/impedance control, grasping, and manipulation control
              tance control,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Anchorage, AK,    of anthropomorphic hand-arm systems. She has published more than 20 journal
          USA, 2010, pp. 554–561.                                          and conference papers and book chapters.





Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
      FICUCIELLO et al.: VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL OF REDUNDANT MANIPULATORS                                                                863



                              Luigi Villani (S’94–M’97–SM’03) was born in Avel-                      Bruno Siciliano (M’91–SM’94–F’00) was born in
                                     lino, Italy, on December 5, 1966. He received the                            Naples, Italy, on October 27, 1959. He received the
                             Laurea degree in electronic engineering and the Re-                          Laurea degree and the Research Doctorate degree
                                search Doctorate degree in electronic engineering and                               in electronic engineering from University of Naples,
                             computer science from University of Naples, Naples,                            Naples, in 1982 and 1987, respectively.
                                        Italy, in 1992 and 1996, respectively.                                 He is currently a Professor of control and robotics
                         He is an Associate Professor of automatic control                         and the Director of the PRISMA (Projects of Indus-
                              with the Department of Electrical Engineering and                                     trial and Service Robotics, Mechatronics and Au-
                               Information Technology, University of Naples. He                            tomation) Laboratory, Department of Electrical En-
                              has coauthored six books and more than 50 journal                             gineering and Information Technology, University of
                               papers and 100 conference papers and book chapters.                            Naples. He has coauthored seven books, 80 journal
      His book Robotics: Modelling, Planning and Control is one of the most widely    papers, and 230 international conference papers and book chapters. His book
       adopted textbooks worldwide. His research interests include force/motion con-    Robotics: Modelling, Planning and Control is one of the most widely adopted
         trol of manipulators, safe physical human–robot interaction, cooperative robot   textbooks worldwide. He has delivered 140 invited lectures and seminars at
       manipulation, lightweight ﬂexible arms, adaptive and nonlinear control of me-    institutions worldwide. His research interests include identiﬁcation and adap-
       chanical systems, visual servoing, fault diagnosis, and fault tolerance for dy-    tive control, impedance and force control, visual tracking and servoing, redun-
       namical systems.                                                             dant and cooperative manipulators, lightweight ﬂexible arms, aerial robots, and
          Dr. Villani was an Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS   human-centered and service robotics.
      from 2007 to 2011 and Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONTROL       Dr. Siciliano is a Fellow of the American Society of Mechanical Engi-
      SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY from 2005 to 2012.                                     neers and the International Federation of Automatic Control. He is Co-Editor
                                                                                      of Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics series, and has served on the Editorial
                                                                            Boards of several journals as well as Chair or Co-Chair for numerous inter-
                                                                                         national conferences. He co-edited the Springer Handbook of Robotics, which
                                                                                      received the AAP PROSE Award for Excellence in Physical Sciences and Math-
                                                                                  ematics and was also the winner in the category Engineering and Technology.
                                                                              His group has been granted 14 European projects, including an Advanced Grant
                                                                          from the European Research Council. He has served the IEEE Robotics and
                                                                           Automation Society as President, as Vice President for Technical Activities and
                                                                               Vice President for Publications, as a member of the AdCom, and as a Distin-
                                                                                 guished Lecturer. He has received several awards, including the 2015 IEEE RAS
                                                                          George Saridis Leadership Award in Robotics and Automation.





Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.