BlockPush
Kitchen
p1
p2
p1
p2
p3
p4
LSTM-GMM [29]
0.03
0.01
1.00
0.90
0.74
0.34
IBC [12]
0.01
0.00
0.99
0.87
0.61
0.24
BET [42]
0.96
0.71
0.99
0.93
0.71
0.44
DiffusionPolicy-C
0.36
0.11
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
DiffusionPolicy-T
0.99
0.94
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.96
TABLE IV: Multi-Stage Tasks (State Observation). For PushBlock,
px is the frequency of pushing x blocks into the targets. For Kitchen,
px is the frequency of interacting with x or more objects (e.g. bottom
burner). Diffusion Policy performs better, especially for difficult
metrics such as p2 for Block Pushing and p4 for Kitchen, as
demonstrated by our results.
end-effector (blue)s. Variation is added by random initial
conditions for T block and end-effector. The task requires
exploiting complex and contact-rich object dynamics to push
the T block precisely, using point contacts. There are two
variants: one with RGB image observations and another with
9 2D keypoints obtained from the ground-truth pose of the T
block, both with proprioception for end-effector location.
3) Multimodal Block Pushing: adapted from BET [42], this
task tests the policy’s ability to model multimodal action dis-
tributions by pushing two blocks into two squares in any order.
The demonstration data is generated by a scripted oracle with
access to groundtruth state info. This oracle randomly selects
an initial block to push and moves it to a randomly selected
square. The remaining block is then pushed into the remaining
square. This task contains long-horizon multimodality that can
not be modeled by a single function mapping from observation
to action.
4) Franka Kitchen: is a popular environment for evaluating
the ability of IL and Offline-RL methods to learn multiple
long-horizon tasks. Proposed in Relay Policy Learning [15],
the Franka Kitchen environment contains 7 objects for inter-
action and comes with a human demonstration dataset of 566
demonstrations, each completing 4 tasks in arbitrary order. The
goal is to execute as many demonstrated tasks as possible,
regardless of order, showcasing both short-horizon and long-
horizon multimodality.
B. Evaluation Methodology
We present the best-performing for each baseline method
on each benchmark from all possible sources – our reproduced
result (LSTM-GMM) or original number reported in the paper
(BET, IBC). We report results from the average of the last
10 checkpoints (saved every 50 epochs) across 3 training
seeds and 50 environment initializations (an average of 1500
experiments in total). The metric for most tasks is success rate,
except for the Push-T task, which uses target area coverage. In
addition, we report the average of best-performing checkpoints
for robomimic and Push-T tasks to be consistent with the
evaluation methodology of their respective original papers
[29, 12]. All state-based tasks are trained for 4500 epochs, and
image-based tasks for 3000 epochs. Each method is evaluated
with its best-performing action space: position control for
Diffusion Policy and velocity control for baselines (the effect
of action space will be discussed in detail in Sec V-C). The
results from these simulation benchmarks are summarized in
Table I and Table II.
C. Key Findings
Diffusion Policy outperforms alternative methods on all
tasks and variants, with both state and vision observations,
in our simulation benchmark study (Tabs I, II and IV) with
an average improvement of 46.9%. Following paragraphs
summarize the key takeaways.
Diffusion Policy can express short-horizon multimodal-
ity. We define short-horizon action multimodality as multiple
ways of achieving the same immediate goal, which is preva-
lent in human demonstration data [29]. In Fig 4, we present a
case study of this type of short-horizon multimodality in the
Push-T task. Diffusion Policy learns to approach the contact
point equally likely from left or right, while LSTM-GMM
[29] and IBC [12] exhibit bias toward one side and BET [42]
cannot commit to one mode.
Diffusion Policy can express long-horizon multimodality.
Long-horizon multimodality is the completion of different
sub-goals in inconsistent order. For example, the order of
pushing a particular block in the Block Push task or the order
of interacting with 7 possible objects in the Kitchen task are
arbitrary. We find that Diffusion Policy copes well with this
type of multimodality; it outperforms baselines on both tasks
by a large margin: 32% improvement on Block Push’s p2
metric and 213% improvement on Kitchen’s p4 metric.
Diffusion Policy can better leverage position control. Our
ablation study (Fig. 5) shows that selecting position control
as the diffusion-policy action space significantly outperformed
velocity control. The baseline methods we evaluate, however,
work best with velocity control (and this is reflected in the
literature where most existing work reports using velocity-
control action spaces [29, 42, 60, 13, 28, 27]).
The tradeoff in action horizon. As discussed in Sec IV-C,
having an action horizon greater than 1 helps the policy predict
consistent actions and compensate for idle portions of the
demonstration, but too long a horizon reduces performance
due to slow reaction time. Our experiment confirms this trade-
off (Fig. 6 left) and found the action horizon of 8 steps to be
optimal for most tasks that we tested.
Robustness against latency. Diffusion Policy employs re-
ceding horizon position control to predict a sequence of actions
into the future. This design helps address the latency gap
caused by image processing, policy inference, and network
delay. Our ablation study with simulated latency showed
Diffusion Policy is able to maintain peak performance with
