drawbacks of position control and is better able to exploit
position control’s advantages.
Square
Kitchen p4
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Relative Success Rate Change
Velocity vs Positional Control
LSTM-GMM
BET
DiffusionPolicy-C
DiffusionPolicy-T
Fig. 5: Velocity v.s. Position Control. The performance differ-
ence when switching from velocity to position control. While both
BCRNN and BET performance decrease, Diffusion Policy is able to
leverage the advantage of position and improve its performance.
C. Benefits of Action-Sequence Prediction
Sequence prediction is often avoided in most policy learning
methods due to the difficulties in effectively sampling from
high-dimensional output spaces. For example, IBC would
struggle in effectively sampling high-dimensional action space
with a non-smooth energy landscape. Similarly, BC-RNN and
BET would have difficulty specifying the number of modes
that exist in the action distribution (needed for GMM or k-
means steps).
In contrast, DDPM scales well with output dimensions
without sacrificing the expressiveness of the model, as demon-
strated in many image generation applications. Leveraging this
capability, Diffusion Policy represents action in the form of a
high-dimensional action sequence, which naturally addresses
the following issues:
• Temporal action consistency: Take Fig 4 as an example.
To push the T block into the target from the bottom, the
policy can go around the T block from either left or right.
However, suppose each action in the sequence is predicted
as independent multimodal distributions (as done in BC-
RNN and BET). In that case, consecutive actions could be
drawn from different modes, resulting in jittery actions that
alternate between the two valid trajectories.
• Robustness to idle actions: Idle actions occur when a
demonstration is paused and results in sequences of identical
positional actions or near-zero velocity actions. It is common
during teleoperation and is sometimes required for tasks
like liquid pouring. However, single-step policies can easily
overfit to this pausing behavior. For example, BC-RNN and
IBC often get stuck in real-world experiments when the idle
actions are not explicitly removed from training.
D. Training Stability
While IBC, in theory, should possess similar advantages
as diffusion policies. However, achieving reliable and high-
performance results from IBC in practice is challenging due
to IBC’s inherent training instability [48]. Fig 7 shows training
1
2
4
8
16
32
64 128
Action Horizon (steps)
0.0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
-0.6
Relative Perf Change
Action Horizon
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Latency (steps)
Latency Robustness
PushT
Square
Fig. 6: Diffusion Policy Ablation Study. Change (difference) in
success rate relative to the maximum for each task is shown on the Y-
axis. Left: trade-off between temporal consistency and responsiveness
when selecting the action horizon. Right: Diffusion Policy with
position control is robust against latency. Latency is defined as the
number of steps between the last frame of observations to the first
action that can be executed.
error spikes and unstable evaluation performance throughout
the training process, making hyperparameter turning critical
and checkpoint selection difficult. As a result, Florence et al.
[12] evaluate every checkpoint and report results for the best-
performing checkpoint. In a real-world setting, this workflow
necessitates the evaluation of many policies on hardware to
select a final policy. Here, we discuss why Diffusion Policy
appears significantly more stable to train.
An implicit policy represents the action distribution using
an Energy-Based Model (EBM):
pθ(a|o) = e−Eθ (o,a)
Z(o,θ)
(6)
where Z(o,θ) is an intractable normalization constant (with
respect to a).
To train the EBM for implicit policy, an InfoNCE-style loss
function is used, which equates to the negative log-likelihood
of Eq 6:
LinfoNCE = −log(
e−Eθ (o,a)
e−Eθ (o,a) +∑
Nneg
j=1e−Eθ (o,ea j) )
(7)
where a set of negative samples {eaj}Nneg
j=1 are used to estimate
the intractable normalization constant Z(o,θ). In practice, the
inaccuracy of negative sampling is known to cause training
instability for EBMs [11, 48].
Diffusion Policy and DDPMs sidestep the issue of estimat-
ing Z(a,θ) altogether by modeling the score function [46] of
the same action distribution in Eq 6:
∇a log p(a|o) = −∇aEθ(a,o)−∇a logZ(o,θ)
|
{z
}
=0
≈−εθ(a,o)
(8)
where the noise-prediction network εθ(a,o) is approximating
the negative of the score function ∇a log p(a|o) [26], which
is independent of the normalization constant Z(o,θ). As a
result, neither the inference (Eq 4) nor training (Eq 5) process
of Diffusion Policy involves evaluating Z(o,θ), thus making
Diffusion Policy training more stable.
