①
②
Human
IBC
LSTM-GMM
Diffusion Policy
Demo
pos
vel
pos
vel
T-E2E ImgNet R3M E2E
IoU
0.84
0.14 0.19 0.24
0.25
0.53
0.24
0.66 0.80
Succ %
1.00
0.00 0.00 0.20
0.10
0.65
0.15
0.80 0.95
Duration
20.3
56.3 41.6 47.3
51.7
57.5
55.8
31.7 22.9
TABLE V: Realworld Push-T Experiment. a) Hardware setup. b)
Illustration of the task. The robot needs to 1⃝precisely push the T-
shaped block into the target region, and 2⃝move the end-effector to
the end-zone. c) The ground truth end state used to calculate IoU
metrics used in this table. Table: Success is defined by the end-
state IoU greater than the minimum IoU in the demonstration dataset.
Average episode duration presented in seconds. T-E2E stands for end-
to-end trained Transformer-based Diffusion Policy
latency up to 4 steps (Fig 6). We also find that velocity control
is more affected by latency than position control, likely due
to compounding error effects.
Diffusion Policy is stable to train. We found that the
optimal hyperparameters for Diffusion Policy are mostly con-
sistent across tasks. In contrast, IBC [12] is prone to training
instability. This property is discussed in Sec IV-D.
VI. REALWORLD EVALUATION
We evaluated Diffusion Policy in the realworld performance
on 4 tasks across 2 hardware setups – with training data from
different demonstrators for each setup. On the realworld Push-
T task, we perform ablations examining Diffusion Policy on
2 architecture options and 3 visual encoder options; we also
benchmarked against 2 baseline methods with both position-
control and velocity-control action spaces. On all tasks, Dif-
fusion Policy variants with both CNN backbones and end-
to-end-trained visual encoders yielded the best performance.
More details about the task setup and parameters may be found
in supplemental materials.
A. Realworld Push-T Task
Real-world Push-T is significantly harder than the simulated
version due to 3 modifications: 1. The real-world Push-T
task is multi-stage. It requires the robot to 1⃝push the T
block into the target and then 2⃝move its end-effector into a
designated end-zone to avoid occlusion. 2. The policy needs
to make fine adjustments to make sure the T is fully in the
goal region before heading to the end-zone, creating additional
short-term multimodality. 3. The IoU metric is measured at
the last step instead of taking the maximum over all steps.
We threshold success rate by the minimum achieved IoU
metric from the human demonstration dataset. Our UR5-based
experiment setup is shown in Fig V. Diffusion Policy predicts
robot commands at 10 Hz and these commands then linearly
interpolated to 125 Hz for robot execution.
Result Analysis. Diffusion Policy performed close to hu-
man level with 95% success rate and 0.8 v.s. 0.84 average
IoU, compared with the 0% and 20% success rate of best-
performing IBC and LSTM-GMM variants. Fig 8 qualitatively
illustrates the behavior for each method starting from the same
initial condition. We observed that poor performance during
the transition between stages is the most common failure case
for the baseline method due to high multimodality during
those sections and an ambiguous decision boundary. LSTM-
GMM got stuck near the T block in 8 out of 20 evaluations
(3rd row), while IBC prematurely left the T block in 6 out
of 20 evaluations (4th row). We did not follow the common
practice of removing idle actions from training data due to
task requirements, which also contributed to LSTM and IBC’s
tendency to overfit on small actions and get stuck in this task.
The results are best appreciated with videos in supplemental
materials.
End-to-end v.s. pre-trained vision encoders We tested
Diffusion Policy with pre-trained vision encoders (ImageNet
[9] and R3M[31]), as seen in Tab. V. Diffusion Policy with
R3M achieves an 80% success rate but predicts jittery actions
and is more likely to get stuck compared to the end-to-end
trained version. Diffusion Policy with ImageNet showed less
promising results with abrupt actions and poor performance.
We found that end-to-end training is still the most effective
way to incorporate visual observation into Diffusion Policy,
and our best-performing models were all end-to-end trained.
Robustness against perturbation Diffusion Policy’s ro-
bustness against visual and physical perturbations was eval-
uated in a separate episode from experiments in Tab V. As
shown in Fig 9, three types of perturbations are applied. 1)
The front camera was blocked for 3 secs by a waving hand
(left column), but the diffusion policy, despite exhibiting some
jitter, remained on-course and pushed the T block into position.
2) We shifted the T block while Diffusion Policy was making
fine adjustments to the T block’s position. Diffusion policy
immediately re-planned to push from the opposite direction,
negating the impact of perturbation. 3) We moved the T
block while the robot was en route to the end-zone after
the first stage’s completion. The Diffusion Policy immediately
changed course to adjust the T block back to its target and
then continued to the end-zone. This experiment indicates that
Diffusion Policy may be able to synthesize novel behavior
in response to unseen observations.
B. Mug Flipping Task
The mug flipping task is designed to test Diffusion Policy’s
ability to handle complex 3D rotations while operating close
to the hardware’s kinematic limits. The goal is to reorient a
randomly placed mug to have 1⃝the lip facing down 2⃝the
