noise Ak
t are passed in as input tokens for the transformer
decoder blocks, with the sinusoidal embedding for diffusion
iteration k prepended as the first token. The observation Ot is
transformed into observation embedding sequence by a shared
MLP, which is then passed into the transformer decoder stack
as input features. The "gradient" εθ(Ot,Atk,k) is predicted by
each corresponding output token of the decoder stack.
In our state-based experiments, most of the best-performing
policies are achieved with the transformer backbone, espe-
cially when the task complexity and rate of action change are
high. However, we found the transformer to be more sensitive
to hyperparameters. The difficulty of transformer training [25]
is not unique to Diffusion Policy and could potentially be
resolved in the future with improved transformer training
techniques or increased data scale.
Recommendations. In general, we recommend starting
with the CNN-based diffusion policy implementation as the
first attempt at a new task. If performance is low due to task
complexity or high-rate action changes, then the Time-series
Diffusion Transformer formulation can be used to potentially
improve performance at the cost of additional tuning.
B. Visual Encoder
The visual encoder maps the raw image sequence into
a latent embedding Ot and is trained end-to-end with the
diffusion policy. Different camera views use separate encoders,
and images in each timestep are encoded independently and
then concatenated to form Ot. We used a standard ResNet-
18 (without pretraining) as the encoder with the following
modifications: 1) Replace the global average pooling with
a spatial softmax pooling to maintain spatial information
[29]. 2) Replace BatchNorm with GroupNorm [57] for stable
training. This is important when the normalization layer is
used in conjunction with Exponential Moving Average [17]
(commonly used in DDPMs).
C. Noise Schedule
The noise schedule, defined by σ, α, γ and the additive
Gaussian Noise εk as functions of k, has been actively studied
[18, 33]. The underlying noise schedule controls the extent
to which diffusion policy captures high and low-frequency
characteristics of action signals. In our control tasks, we
empirically found that the Square Cosine Schedule proposed
in iDDPM [33] works best for our tasks.
D. Accelerating Inference for Real-time Control
We use the diffusion process as the policy for robots; hence,
it is critical to have a fast inference speed for closed-loop
real-time control. The Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models
(DDIM) approach [45] decouples the number of denoising
iterations in training and inference, thereby allowing the
algorithm to use fewer iterations for inference to speed up
the process. In our real-world experiments, using DDIM with
100 training iterations and 10 inference iterations enables 0.1s
inference latency on an Nvidia 3080 GPU.
IV. INTRIGUING PROPERTIES OF DIFFUSION POLICY
In this section, we provide some insights and intuitions
about diffusion policy and its advantages over other forms of
policy representations.
A. Model Multi-Modal Action Distributions
The challenge of modeling multi-modal distribution in hu-
man demonstrations has been widely discussed in behavior
cloning literature [12, 42, 29]. Diffusion Policy’s ability to
express multimodal distributions naturally and precisely is one
of its key advantages.
Intuitively, multi-modality in action generation for diffusion
policy arises from two sources – an underlying stochastic
sampling procedure and a stochastic initialization. In Stochas-
tic Langevin Dynamics, an initial sample AK
t
is drawn from
standard Gaussian at the beginning of each sampling process,
which helps specify different possible convergence basins for
the final action prediction A0
t . This action is then further
stochastically optimized, with added Gaussian perturbations
across a large number of iterations, which enables individual
action samples to converge and move between different multi-
modal action basins. Fig. 4, shows an example of the Diffusion
Policy’s multimodal behavior in a planar pushing task (Push
T, introduced below) without explicit demonstration for the
tested scenario.
Diffusion Policy
LSTM-GMM
BET
IBC
Fig. 4:
Multimodal behavior. At the given state, the end-effector
(blue) can either go left or right to push the block. Diffusion Policy
learns both modes and commits to only one mode within each rollout.
In contrast, both LSTM-GMM [29] and IBC [12] are biased toward
one mode, while BET [42] fails to commit to a single mode due to
its lack of temporal action consistency. Actions generated by rolling
out 40 steps for the best-performing checkpoint.
B. Synergy with Position Control
We find that Diffusion Policy with a position-control action
space consistently outperforms Diffusion Policy with velocity
control, as shown in Fig 5. This surprising result stands in
contrast to the majority of recent behavior cloning work that
generally relies on velocity control [29, 42, 60, 13, 28, 27].
We speculate that there are two primary reasons for this
discrepancy: First, action multimodality is more pronounced in
position-control mode than it is when using velocity control.
Because Diffusion Policy better expresses action multimodal-
ity than existing approaches, we speculate that it is inherently
less affected by this drawback than existing methods. Further-
more, position control suffers less than velocity control from
compounding error effects and is thus more suitable for action-
sequence prediction (as discussed in the following section). As
a result, Diffusion Policy is both less affected by the primary
