3
Pouring Goal
Spreading Goal
2
1
1
2
3
4
Pour
Spread
IoU
Succ
Coverage
Succ
Human
0.79
1.00
0.79
1.00
LSTM-GMM
0.06
0.00
0.27
0.00
Diffusion Policy
0.74
0.79
0.77
1.00
Fig. 11: Realworld Sauce Manipulation.
[Left] 6DoF pouring
Task. The robot needs to 1⃝dip the ladle to scoop sauce from the
bowl, 2⃝approach the center of the pizza dough, 3⃝pour sauce, and
4⃝lift the ladle to finish the task. [Right] Periodic spreading Task
The robot needs to 1⃝approach the center of the sauce with a grasped
spoon, 2⃝spread the sauce to cover pizza in a spiral pattern, and 3⃝
lift the spoon to finish the task.
Dof action spaces, and periodic actions in real-world setups.
Our Franka Panda setup and tasks are shown in Fig 11.
The goal for the 6DoF pouring task is to pour one full
ladle of sauce onto the center of the pizza dough, with
performance measured by IoU between the poured sauce
mask and a nominal circle at the center of the pizza dough
(illustrated by the green circle in Fig 11). The goal for the
periodic spreading task is to spread sauce on pizza dough,
with performance measured by sauce coverage. Variations
across evaluation episodes come from random locations for the
dough and the sauce bowl. The success rate is computed by
thresholding with minimum human performance. Results are
best viewed in supplemental videos. Both tasks were trained
with the same Push-T hyperparameters, and successful policies
were achieved on the first attempt.
The sauce pouring task requires the robot to remain sta-
tionary for a period of time to fill the ladle with viscous
tomato sauce. The resulting idle actions are known to be
challenging for behavior cloning algorithms and therefore are
often avoided or filtered out. Fine adjustments during pouring
are necessary during sauce pouring to ensure coverage and to
achieve the desired shape.
The demonstrated sauce-spreading strategy is inspired by
the human chef technique, which requires both a long-horizon
cyclic pattern to maximize coverage and short-horizon feed-
back for even distribution (since the tomato sauce used often
drips out in lumps with unpredictable sizes). Periodic motions
are known to be difficult to learn and therefore are often ad-
dressed by specialized action representations [58]. Both tasks
require the policy to self-terminate by lifting the ladle/spoon.
Result Analysis. Diffusion policy achieves close-to-human
performance on both tasks, with coverage 0.74 vs 0.79 on
pouring and 0.77 vs 0.79 on spreading. Diffusion policy
reacted gracefully to external perturbations such as moving the
pizza dough by hand during pouring and spreading. Results
are best appreciated with videos in the supplemental material.
LSTM-GMM performs poorly on both sauce pouring and
spreading tasks. It failed to lift the ladle after successfully
scooping sauce in 15 out of 20 of the pouring trials. When
the ladle was successfully lifted, the sauce was poured off-
centered. LSTM-GMM failed to self-terminate in all trials.
We suspect LSTM-GMM’s hidden state failed to capture suf-
ficiently long history to distinguish between the ladle dipping
and the lifting phases of the task. For sauce spreading, LSTM-
GMM always lifts the spoon right after the start, and failed to
make contact with the sauce in all 20 experiments.
VII. RELATED WORK
Creating capable robots without requiring explicit program-
ming of behaviors is a longstanding challenge in the field
[3, 2, 38]. While conceptually simple, behavior cloning has
shown surprising promise on an array of real-world robot
tasks, including manipulation [60, 13, 28, 27, 59, 37, 4]
and autonomous driving [36, 6]. Current behavior cloning
approaches can be categorized into two groups, depending on
the policy’s structure.
Explicit Policy. The simplest form of explicit policies
maps from world state or observation directly to action
[36, 60, 13, 41, 50, 37, 6]. They can be supervised with a
direct regression loss and have efficient inference time with
one forward pass. Unfortunately, this type of policy is not
suitable for modeling multi-modal demonstrated behavior, and
struggles with high-precision tasks [12]. A popular approach
to model multimodal action distributions while maintaining
the simplicity of direction action mapping is convert the
regression task into classification by discretizing the action
space [59, 56, 4]. However, the number of bins needed to ap-
proximate a continuous action space grows exponentially with
increasing dimensionality. Another approach is to combine
Categorical and Gaussian distributions to represent continuous
multimodal distributions via the use of MDNs [5, 29] or
clustering with offset prediction [42, 43]. Nevertheless, these
models tend to be sensitive to hyperparameter tuning, exhibit
mode collapse, and are still limited in their ability to express
high-precision behavior [12].
Implicit Policy. Implicit policies [12, 22] define distribu-
tions over actions by using Energy-Based Models (EBMs)
[24, 10, 8, 14, 11]. In this setting, each action is assigned
an energy value, with action prediction corresponding to the
optimization problem of finding a minimal energy action.
Since different actions may be assigned low energies, implicit
policies naturally represent multi-modal distributions. How-
ever, existing implicit policies [12] are unstable to train due
to the necessity of drawing negative samples when computing
the underlying Info-NCE loss.
Diffusion Models. Diffusion models are probabilistic gen-
erative models that iteratively refine randomly sampled noise
into draws from an underlying distribution. They can also
