pizza dough as well as the poured sauce shape are varied.
For resetting, we manually gather sauce towards the center
of the dough, and wipe the remaining dough clean. The
rotational components for tele-op commands are discarded
during spreading and sauce transferring to avoid accidentally
scooping or spilling sauce.
2) Evaluation: Both Diffusion Policy and LSTM-GMM
are trained for 1000 epochs. The last checkpoint is used for
evaluation.
Each method is evaluated from the same set of random
initial conditions, where positions of the pizza dough and
sauce bowl are varied. We use a similar protocol as in Push-
T to set up initial conditions. We do not try to match initial
shape of poured sauce for spreading. Instead, we make sure
the amount of sauce is fixed during all experiments.
The evaluation episodes are terminated by moving the spoon
upward (away form the dough) for 0.5 seconds, or when the
operator deems the policy’s behavior is unsafe.
The coverage metric is computed by first projecting the
RGB image from both the left and right cameras onto the
table space through homography, then computing the coverage
in each projected image. The maximum coverage between the
left and right cameras is reported.
3) UR5 robot station: Experiments for the Push-T task are
performed on the UR5 robot station.
The UR5 robot accepts end-effector space positional com-
mand at 125Hz, which is linearly interpolated from the 10Hz
command from either human demonstration or the policy. The
interpolation controller limits the end-effector velocity to be
below 0.43 m/s and its position to be within the region 1cm
above the table for safety reason. Position-controlled policies
directly predicts the desired end-effector pose, while velocity-
controlled policies predicts the difference the current positional
setpoint and the previous setpoint.
The UR5 robot station has 5 realsense D415 depth camera
recording 720p RGB videos at 30fps. Only 2 of the cameras
are used for policy observation, which are down-sampled to
320x240 at 10fps.
During demonstration, the operator teleoperates the robot
via a 3dconnexion SpaceMouse at 10Hz.
J. Franka robot station
Experiments for Sauce Pouring and Spreading tasks are
performed on the Franka robot station.
A custom mid-level controller is implemented to generate
desired joint positions from desired end effector poses from
the learned policies. At each time step, we solve a differential
kinematics problem (formulated as a Quadratic Program) to
compute the desired joint velocity to track the desired end
effector velocity. The resulting joint velocity is Euler inte-
grated into joint position, which is tracked by a joint level
controller on the robot. This formulation allows us to impose
constraints such as collision avoidance, safety region for end
effector and joint limits. It also enables regulating redundant
DoF in the null space of the end effector commands. This
mid-level controller is particularly valuable for safeguarding
the learned policy during hardware deployment.
The operator uses a SpaceMouse input device to control
robot’s end effector, and the gripper is controlled by a trigger
button. Tele-op and learned policies run at 10Hz, and the mid-
level controller runs around 1kHz. Desired end effector pose
commands are interpolated by the mid-level controller. This
station has 2 realsense D415 RGBD camera streaming VGA
RGB images at 30fps, which are downsampled to 320x240 at
10fps as input to the learned policies.
