be conceptually understood as learning the gradient field of
an implicit action score and then optimizing that gradient
during inference. Diffusion models [44, 18] have recently been
applied to solve various different control tasks [20, 51, 1].
In particular, Janner et al. [20] and Huang et al. [19] explore
how diffusion models may be used in the context of planning
and infer a trajectory of actions that may be executed in a given
environment. In the context of Reinforcement Learning, Wang
et al. [53] use diffusion model for policy representation and
regularization with state-based observations. In contrast, in this
work, we explore how diffusion models may instead be effec-
tively applied in the context of behavioral cloning for effective
visuomotor control policy. To construct effective visuomotor
control policies, we propose to combine DDPM’s ability to
predict high-dimensional action squences with closed-loop
control, as well as a new transformer architecture for action
diffusion and a manner to integrate visual inputs into the action
diffusion model.
Wang et al. [54] explore how diffusion models learned from
expert demonstrations can be used to augment classical explicit
polices without directly taking advantage of diffusion models
as policy representation.
Concurrent to us, Pearce et al. [34], Reuss et al. [39] and
Hansen-Estruch et al. [16] has conducted a complimentary
analysis of diffusion-based policies in simulated environments.
While they focus more on effective sampling strategies, lever-
aging classifier-free guidance for goal-conditioning as well
as applications in Reinforcement Learning, and we focus on
effective action spaces, our empirical findings largely concur
in the simulated regime. In addition, our extensive real-
world experiments provide strong evidence for the importance
of a receding-horizon prediction scheme, the careful choice
between velocity and position control, and the necessity of
optimization for real-time inference and other critical design
decisions for a physical robot system.
VIII. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Although we have demonstrated the effectiveness of diffu-
sion policy in both simulation and real-world systems, there
are limitations that future work can improve. First, our im-
plementation inherits limitations from behavior cloning, such
as suboptimal performance with inadequate demonstration
data. Diffusion policy can be applied to other paradigms,
such as reinforcement learning [54, 16], to take advantage of
suboptimal and negative data. Second, diffusion policy has
higher computational costs and inference latency compared
to simpler methods like LSTM-GMM. Our action sequence
prediction approach partially mitigates this issue, but may not
suffice for tasks requiring high rate control. Future work can
exploit the latest advancements in diffusion model acceleration
methods to reduce the number of inference steps required,
such as new noise schedules[7], inference solvers[23], and
consistency models [47].
IX. CONCLUSION
In this work, we assess the feasibility of diffusion-based
policies for robot behaviors. Through a comprehensive evalu-
ation of 12 tasks in simulation and the real world, we demon-
strate that diffusion-based visuomotor policies consistently
and definitively outperform existing methods while also being
stable and easy to train. Our results also highlight critical
design factors, including receding-horizon action prediction,
end-effector position control, and efficient visual conditioning,
that is crucial for unlocking the full potential of diffusion-
based policies. While many factors affect the ultimate quality
of behavior-cloned policies — including the quality and quan-
tity of demonstrations, the physical capabilities of the robot,
the policy architecture, and the pretraining regime used —
our experimental results strongly indicate that policy structure
poses a significant performance bottleneck during behavior
cloning. We hope that this work drives further exploration
in the field into diffusion-based policies and highlights the
importance of considering all aspects of the behavior cloning
process beyond just the data used for policy training.
X. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported in part by NSF Awards 2037101,
2132519, 2037101, and Toyota Research Institute. We would
like to thank Google for the UR5 robot hardware. The views
and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors
and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the
official policies, either expressed or implied, of the sponsors.
REFERENCES
[1] Anurag Ajay, Yilun Du, Abhi Gupta, Joshua Tenenbaum,
Tommi Jaakkola, and Pulkit Agrawal.
Is conditional
generative modeling all you need for decision-making?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15657, 2022. 11
[2] Brenna D Argall, Sonia Chernova, Manuela Veloso,
and Brett Browning. A survey of robot learning from
demonstration.
Robotics and autonomous systems, 57
(5):469–483, 2009. 10
[3] Christopher G Atkeson and Stefan Schaal. Robot learn-
ing from demonstration.
In ICML, volume 97, pages
12–20, 1997. 10
[4] Yahav Avigal, Lars Berscheid, Tamim Asfour, Torsten
Kröger, and Ken Goldberg. Speedfolding: Learning effi-
cient bimanual folding of garments. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems (IROS), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2022. 10
[5] Christopher M Bishop. Mixture density networks. Aston
University, 1994. 10
[6] Mariusz
Bojarski,
Davide
Del
Testa,
Daniel
Dworakowski, Bernhard Firner, Beat Flepp, Prasoon
Goyal, Lawrence D Jackel, Mathew Monfort, Urs
Muller, Jiakai Zhang, et al.
End to end learning for
self-driving cars.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07316,
2016. 10
