Robotics: Science and Systems 2023
Daegu, Republic of Korea, July 10-July 14, 2023
Diffusion Policy:
Visuomotor Policy Learning via Action Diffusion
Cheng Chi1, Siyuan Feng2, Yilun Du3, Zhenjia Xu1, Eric Cousineau2, Benjamin Burchfiel2, Shuran Song1
1 Columbia University
2 Toyota Research Institute
3 MIT
https://diffusion-policy.cs.columbia.edu
Mixture of Gaussians
Explicit Policy
(a) Explicit Policy
(b) Implicit Policy
(c) Diffusion Policy
Implicit Policy
Diffusion Policy
 iter
Action 
Representation
Scalar (Regression)
Categorical
Fig. 1: Policy Representations. a) Explicit policy with different types of action representations. b) Implicit policy learns an energy function
conditioned on both action and observation and optimizes for actions that minimize the energy landscape c) Diffusion policy refines noise
into actions via a learned gradient field. This formulation provides stable training, allows the learned policy to accurately model multimodal
action distributions, and accommodates high-dimensional action sequences.
Abstract—This paper introduces Diffusion Policy, a new way of
generating robot behavior by representing a robot’s visuomotor
policy as a conditional denoising diffusion process. We bench-
mark Diffusion Policy across 12 different tasks from 4 different
robot manipulation benchmarks and find that it consistently
outperforms existing state-of-the-art robot learning methods with
an average improvement of 46.9%. Diffusion Policy learns the
gradient of the action-distribution score function and iteratively
optimizes with respect to this gradient field during inference
via a series of stochastic Langevin dynamics steps. We find
that the diffusion formulation yields powerful advantages when
used for robot policies, including gracefully handling multimodal
action distributions, being suitable for high-dimensional action
spaces, and exhibiting impressive training stability. To fully
unlock the potential of diffusion models for visuomotor policy
learning on physical robots, this paper presents a set of key
technical contributions including the incorporation of receding
horizon control, visual conditioning, and the time-series diffusion
transformer. We hope this work will help motivate a new
generation of policy learning techniques that are able to leverage
the powerful generative modeling capabilities of diffusion models.
Code, data, and training details will be publicly available.
I. INTRODUCTION
Policy learning from demonstration, in its simplest form,
can be formulated as the supervised regression task of learning
to map observations to actions. In practice however, the unique
nature of predicting robot actions — such as the existence
of multimodal distributions, sequential correlation, and the
requirement of high precision — makes this task distinct and
challenging compared to other supervised learning problems.
Prior work attempts to address this challenge by exploring
different action representations (Fig 1 a) – using mixtures
of Gaussians [29], categorical representations of quantized
actions [42], or by switching the the policy representation (Fig
1 b) – from explicit to implicit to better capture multi-modal
distributions [12, 56].
In this work, we seek to address this challenge by intro-
ducing a new form of robot visuomotor policy that generates
behavior via a “conditional denoising diffusion process [18]
on robot action space”, Diffusion Policy. In this formulation,
instead of directly outputting an action, the policy infers the
action-score gradient, conditioned on visual observations, for
K denoising iterations (Fig. 1 c). This formulation allows robot
policies to inherit several key properties from diffusion models
– significantly improving performance.
• Expressing multimodal action distributions. By learn-
ing the gradient of the action score function [46] and
performing Stochastic Langevin Dynamics sampling on
this gradient field, Diffusion policy can express arbitrary
normalizable distributions [32], which includes multi-
modal action distributions, a well-known challenge for
policy learning.
• High-dimensional output space. As demonstrated by
their impressive image generation results, diffusion mod-
els have shown excellent scalability to high-dimension
output spaces. This property allows the policy to jointly
infer a sequence of future actions instead of single-step
actions, which is critical for encouraging temporal action
consistency and avoiding myopic planning.
• Stable training. Training energy-based policies often
requires negative sampling to estimate an intractable
normalization constant, which is known to cause training
instability [11, 12]. Diffusion Policy bypasses this re-
quirement by learning the gradient of the energy function
and thereby achieves stable training while maintaining
