Time
Diffusion
Policy
(R3M)
Avg of End States
Diffusion
Policy
(End2End)
LSTM-GMM
(End2End)
IBC
(End2End)
A
C
D
B
Fig. 8: Realworld Push-T Comparisons. Columns 1-4 show action trajectories based on key events. The last column shows averaged images
of the end state. A: Diffusion policy (End2End) achieves more accurate and consistent end states. B: Diffusion Policy (R3M) gets stuck
initially but later recovers and finishes the task. C: LSTM-GMM fails to reach the end zone while adjusting the T block, blocking the eval
camera view. D: IBC prematurely ends the pushing stage.
Visual 
Occlusion
Perturbation during
 Pushing Stage
Perturbation during 
Finishing Stage
Fig. 9: Robustness Test for Diffusion Policy. Left: A waving hand
in front of the camera for 3 seconds causes slight jitter, but the
predicted actions still function as expected. Middle: Diffusion Policy
immediately corrects shifted block position to the goal state during
the pushing stage. Right: Policy immediately aborts heading to the
end zone, returning the block to goal state upon detecting block shift.
This novel behavior was never demonstrated. Please check the videos
in the supplementary material.
handle pointing left, as shown in Fig. 10. Depending on the
mug’s initial pose, the demonstrator might directly place the
mug in desired orientation, or may use additional push of the
handle to rotation the mug. As a result, the demonstration
dataset is highly multi-modal: grasp vs push, different types
of grasps (forehand vs backhand) or local grasp adjustments
(rotation around mug’s principle axis), and are particularly
challenging for baseline approaches to capture.
Result Analysis. Diffusion policy is able to complete this
task with 90% success rate over 20 trials. The richness of
2
1
Human
LSTM-GMM
Diffusion Policy
Succ %
1.0
0.0
0.9
Fig. 10: 6DoF Mug Flipping Task. The robot needs to 1⃝Pickup
a randomly placed mug and place it lip down (marked orange). 2⃝
Rotate the mug such that its handle is pointing left.
captured behaviors is best appreciated with the video. Al-
though never demonstrated, the policy is also able to sequence
multiple pushes for handle alignment or regrasps for dropped
mug when necessary. For comparison, we also train a LSTM-
GMM policy trained with a subset of the same data. For 20 in-
distribution initial conditions, the LSTM-GMM policy never
aligns properly with respect to the mug, and fails to grasp in
all trials.
C. Sauce Pouring and Spreading
The sauce pouring and spreading tasks are designed to test
Diffusion Policy’s ability to work with non-rigid objects, 6
