Residual Reinforcement Learning for Robot Control
Tobias Johannink∗1,3, Shikhar Bahl∗2, Ashvin Nair∗2, Jianlan Luo1,2, Avinash Kumar1,
Matthias Loskyll1, Juan Aparicio Ojea1, Eugen Solowjow1, Sergey Levine2
Abstract— Conventional feedback control methods can solve
various types of robot control problems very efﬁciently by
capturing the structure with explicit models, such as rigid body
equations of motion. However, many control problems in mod-
ern manufacturing deal with contacts and friction, which are
difﬁcult to capture with ﬁrst-order physical modeling. Hence,
applying control design methodologies to these kinds of prob-
lems often results in brittle and inaccurate controllers, which
have to be manually tuned for deployment. Reinforcement
learning (RL) methods have been demonstrated to be capable
of learning continuous robot controllers from interactions with
the environment, even for problems that include friction and
contacts. In this paper, we study how we can solve difﬁcult
control problems in the real world by decomposing them into a
part that is solved efﬁciently by conventional feedback control
methods, and the residual which is solved with RL. The ﬁnal
control policy is a superposition of both control signals. We
demonstrate our approach by training an agent to successfully
perform a real-world block assembly task involving contacts
and unstable objects.
I. INTRODUCTION
Robots in today’s manufacturing environments typically
perform repetitive tasks, and often lack the ability to handle
variability and uncertainty. Commonly used control algo-
rithms, such as PID regulators and the computed torque
method, usually follow predeﬁned trajectories with little
adaptive behavior. Many manufacturing tasks require some
degree of adaptability or feedback to the environment,
but signiﬁcant engineering effort and expertise is required
to design feedback control algorithms for these industrial
robots. The engineering time for ﬁne tuning such a controller
might be similar in cost to the robot hardware itself. Being
able to quickly and easily design feedback controllers for
industrial robots would signiﬁcantly broaden the space of
manufacturing tasks that can be automated by robots.
Why is designing a feedback controller for many tasks
hard with classical methods? While conventional feedback
control methods can solve tasks such as path following
efﬁciently, applications that involve contacts between the
robot and its environment are difﬁcult to approach with
conventional control methods. Identifying and characterizing
contacts and friction is difﬁcult—even if a physical model
provides reasonable contact behavior, identifying the phys-
ical parameters of a contact interaction accurately is very
hard. Hence, it is often difﬁcult to achieve adaptable yet
robust control behavior, and signiﬁcant control tuning effort
is required as soon as these elements are introduced. Another
drawback of conventional control methods is their lack of
∗ First three authors contributed equally, 1 Siemens Corporation,
2 University of California, Berkeley, 3 Hamburg University of Technology.
behavior generalization. Thus, all possible system behaviors
must be considered a priori at design time.
Reinforcement learning (RL) methods hold the promise
of solving these challenges because they allow agents to
learn behaviors through interaction with their surrounding
environments and ideally generalize to new scenarios that
differ from the speciﬁcations at the control design stage.
Moreover, RL can handle control problems that are difﬁcult
to approach with conventional controllers because the control
goal can be speciﬁed indirectly as a term in a reward function
and not explicitly as the result of a control action. All of
these aspects are considered enablers for truly autonomous
manufacturing systems and important for fully ﬂexible lot-
size one manufacturing [1]. However, standard RL methods
require the robot learn through interaction, which can be
unsafe initially, and collecting the amount of interaction that
is needed to learn a complex skill from scratch can be time
consuming.
In this paper, we study control problems that are difﬁcult
to approach with conventional feedback control methods.
However, the problems possess structure that can be par-
tially handled with conventional feedback control, e.g. with
impedance control. The residual part of the control task,
which is the part that must consider contacts and external
object dynamics, is solved with RL. The outputs of the
conventional controller and RL are superposed to form the
commanded control. The main contribution of this paper is
a methodology that combines conventional feedback control
with deep RL methods and is illustrated in Fig. 1. Our main
motivation is a control approach that is suitable for real-world
control problems in manufacturing, where the exploratory be-
havior of RL is a safety concern and the data requirements of
deep RL can be expensive. We provide a thorough evaluation
of our method on a block assembly task in simulation and on
physical hardware. When the initial orientation of the blocks
is noisy, our hand-designed controller fails to solve the task,
while residual RL successfully learns to perform the task in
under 3 hours. This suggests that we could usefully apply
our method to practical manufacturing problems.
II. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we set up our problem and summarize the
foundations of classical control and reinforcement learning
that we build on in our approach.
A. Problem Statement - System Theoretic Interpretation
The class of control problems that we are dealing with in
this paper can be viewed from a dynamical systems point of
2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
Palais des congres de Montreal, Montreal, Canada, May 20-24, 2019
978-1-5386-6027-0/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE 6023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on October 04,2026 at 07:06:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
rt
User Deﬁned
User Deﬁned
Reward
Controller + ut
max
θ
E[rt]
πθ
st
Fig. 1: We train an agent directly in the real world to solve a model assembly task involving contacts and unstable objects.
An outline of our method, which consists of combining hand-engineered controllers with a residual RL controller, is shown
on the left. Rollouts of residual RL solving the block insertion task are shown on the right. Residual RL is capable of
learning a feedback controller that adapts to variations in the orientations of the standing blocks and successfully completes
the task of inserting a block between them. Videos are available at residualrl.github.io
.
view as follows. Consider a dynamical system that consists of
a fully actuated robot and underactuated objects in the robot’s
environment. The robot and the objects in its environment
are described by their states sm and so, respectively. The
robot can be controlled through the control input u while the
objects cannot be directly controlled. However, the robot’s
states are coupled with the objects’ states so that indirect
control of so is possible through u. This is for example the
case if the agent has large inertia and is interacting with
small parts as is common in manufacturing. The states of
agent and objects can either be fully observable or they can
be estimated from measurements.
The time-discrete equations of motion of the overall dy-
namical system comprise the robot and objects and can be
stated as
st+1 =

sm,t+1
so,t+1

=

A(sm,t) 0
B(sm,t, so,t) C(so,t)
 
sm,t
so,t

+D

ut
0

,
(1)
where the states can also be subject to algebraic constraints,
which we do no state explicitly here.
The type of control objectives that we are interested
in can be summarized as controlling the agent in order
to manipulate the objects while also fulﬁlling a geometric
objective such as trajectory following. It is difﬁcult to solve
the control problem directly with conventional feedback
control approaches, which compute the difference between a
desired and a measured state variable. In order to achieve best
system performance feedback control methods require well
understood and modeled state transition dynamics. Finding
the optimal control parameters can be difﬁcult or even
impossible if the system dynamics are not fully known.
In (1) the state transition matrices although A(sm) and
C(so) are usually known to a certain extent, because they
represent rigid body dynamics, the coupling matrix B(sm, so)
is usually not known. Physical interactions such as contacts
and friction forces are the dominant effects that B(sm, so)
needs to capture, which also applies to algebraic constraints,
which are functions of sm and so as well. Hence, conven-
tional feedback control synthesis for determining u to control
so is very difﬁcult, and requires trial and error in practice.
Another difﬁculty for directly designing feedback controllers
is due to the fact that, for many control objectives, the states
so need to fulﬁll conditions that cannot be expressed as
deviations (errors) from desired states. This is often the case
when we only know the ﬁnal goal rather than a full trajectory.
Instead of directly designing a feedback control system,
we can instead specify the goal via a reward function. These
reward functions can depend on both sm and so, where the
terms that depend on sm are position related objectives.
B. Interpretation as a Reinforcement Learning Problem
In reinforcement learning, we consider the standard
Markov decision process framework for picking optimal
actions to maximize rewards over discrete timesteps in an
environment E. At every timestep t, an agent is in a state
st, takes an action ut, receives a reward rt, and E evolves to
state st+1. In reinforcement learning, the agent must learn a
policy ut = π(st) to maximize expected returns. We denote
the return by Rt =
T
i=t γ(i−t)
ri, where T is the horizon
that the agent optimizes over and γ is a discount factor for
future rewards. The agent’s objective is to maximize expected
return from the start distribution J = Eri,si∼E,ai∼π[R0].
Unlike the previous section, RL does not attempt to model
the unknown coupled dynamics of the agent and the object.
Instead, it ﬁnds actions that maximizes rewards, without
making any assumptions about the system dynamics. In
this paper, we use value-based RL methods. These methods
estimate the state-action value function:
Qπ
(st, ut) = Eri,si∼E,ui∼π[Rt|st, ut] (2)
= Ert,st+1∼E[rt + γ Eut+1∼π[Qπ
(st+1, ut+1)]] (3)
Equation 3 is a recursive version of Equation 2, and is known
as the Bellman equation. The Bellman equation allows us to
estimate Q via approximate dynamic programming. Value-
based methods can be learned off-policy, making them very
sample efﬁcient, which is vital for real-world robot learning.
III. METHOD
Based on the analysis in Sec. II, we introduce a control
system that consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part is based
on conventional feedback control theory and maximize all
reward terms that are functions of sm. An RL method
6024
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on October 04,2026 at 07:06:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
is superposed and maximizes the reward terms that are
functions of so.
A. Residual Reinforcement Learning
In most robotics tasks, we consider rewards of the form:
rt = f(sm) + g(so). (4)
The term f(sm) is assumed to be a function, which represents
a geometric relationship of robot states, such as a Euclidean
distance or a desired trajectory. The second term of the sum
g(so) can be a general class of functions. Concretely, in our
model assembly task, f(sm) is the reward for moving the
robot gripper between the standing blocks, while g(so) is the
reward for keeping the standing blocks upright and in their
original positions.
The key insight of residual RL is that in many tasks,
f(sm) can be easily optimized a priori of any environment
interaction by conventional controllers, while g(so) may
be easier to learn with RL which can learn ﬁne-grained
hand-engineered feedback controllers even with friction and
contacts. To take advantage of the efﬁciency of conventional
controllers but also the ﬂexbility of RL, we choose:
u = πH(sm) + πθ(sm, so) (5)
as the control action, where πH(sm) is the human-designed
controller and πθ(sm, so) is a learned policy parametrized by
θ and optimized by an RL algorithm to maximize expected
returns on the task.
Inserting (5) into (1) one can see that a properly designed
feedback control law for πH(sm) is able to provide exponen-
tially stable error dynamics of sm if the learned controller
πθ is neglected and the sub statespace is stabilizable. This is
equivalent to maximizing (4) for the case f represents errors
between actual and desired states.
The residual controller πθ(sm, so) can now be used to
maximize the reward term g(so) in (4). Since the control
sequence (5) enters (1) through the dynamics of sm and sm
is in fact the control input to the dynamics of so, we cannot
simply use the a-priori hand-engineered feedback controller
to achieve zero error of sm and independently achieve the
control objective on so. Through the coupling of states we
need to perform an overall optimization of (5), whereby
the hand-engineered feedback controller provides internal
structures and eases the optimization related to the reward
term f(sm).
B. Method Summary
Our method is summarized in Algorithm 1. The key idea
is to combine the ﬂexibility of RL with the efﬁciency of
conventional controllers by additively combining a learnable
parametrized policy with a ﬁxed hand-engineered controller.
As our underlying RL algorithm, we use a variant of
twin delayed deep deterministic policy gradients (TD3) as
described in [2]. TD3 is a value-based RL algorithm for
continuous control based off of the deep deterministic policy
gradient (DDPG) algorithm [3]. We have found that TD3
is stable, sample-efﬁcient, and requires little manual tuning
Algorithm 1 Residual reinforcement learning
Require: policy πθ, hand-engineered controller πH.
1: for n = 0, ..., N − 1 episodes do
2: Initialize random process N for exploration
3: Sample initial state s0 ∼ E.
4: for t = 0, ..., H − 1 steps do
5: Get policy action ut = πθ(st) + Nt.
6: Get action to execute u
t = ut + πH(st).
7: Get next state st+1 ∼ p(· | st, u
t).
8: Store (st, ut, st+1) into replay buffer R.
9: Sample set of transitions (s, u, s
) ∼ R.
10: Optimize θ using RL with sampled transitions.
11: end for
12: end for
compared to DDPG. We used the publicly available rlkit
implementation of TD3 [4]. Our method is independent of
the choice of RL algorithm, and we could apply residual RL
to any other RL algorithm.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We evaluate our method on the task shown in Fig. 2,
both in simulation and in the real world. This section
introduces the details of the experimental setup and provides
an overview of the experiments.
A. Simulated Environment
We use MuJoCo [5], a full-featured simulator for model-
based optimization considering body contacts, to evaluate our
method in simulation. This environment consists of a simu-
lated Sawyer robot arm with seven degrees of freedom and
a parallel gripper. We command the robot with a Cartesian-
space position controller.
B. Real-World Environment
The real-world environment is largely the same as the
simulated environment, except for the controller, rewards,
and observations. We command the robot with a compliant
joint-space impedance controller we have developed to be
smooth and tolerant of contacts. The positioning of the block
being inserted is similar to the simulation but the observation
is estimated from a camera-based tracking system as we do
not have access to ground truth position information.
C. Overview of Experiments
In our experiments we evaluate the following research
questions:
1) Does incorporating a hand-designed controller im-
prove the performance and sample-efﬁciency of RL
algorithms, while still being able to recover from an
imperfect hand-designed controller?
2) Can our method allow robots to be more tolerant of
variation in the environment?
3) Can our method successfully control noisy systems,
compared to classical control methods?
1In all simulation plots, we use 10 random seeds and report a 95%
conﬁdence interval for the mean.
6025
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on October 04,2026 at 07:06:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
0K 100K 200K 300K 400K 500K
Timesteps
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Success
Rate
Simulation Learning Curve
Residual RL
Only RL
1K 2K 2K 3K
Timesteps
5
4
3
2
Average
Return
Real-World Learning Curves
Residual RL
Only RL
Fig. 2: Block assembly task in simulation (left) and real-world (right). The task is to insert a block between the two blocks on
the table without moving the blocks or tipping them over. In the learning curves, we compare our method with RL without
any hand-engineered controller1
. In both simulation and real-world experiments, we see that residual RL learns faster than
RL alone, while achieving better performance than the hand-engineered controller.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Sample Efﬁciency of Residual RL
In this section, we compare our residual RL method with
the human controller alone and RL alone. The following
methods are compared:
1) Only RL: using the same underlying RL algorithm
as our method but without adding a hand-engineered
policy
2) Residual RL: our method which trains a superposition
of the hand-engineered controller and a neural network
policy, with RL
B. Effect of Environment Variation
In automation, environments can be subject to noise and
solving manufacturing tasks become more difﬁcult as vari-
ability in the environment increases. It is difﬁcult to manually
design feedback controllers that are robust to environment
variation, as it might require signiﬁcant human expertise and
tuning. In this experiment, we vary the initial orientation of
the blocks during each episode and demonstrate that residual
RL can still solve the task. We compare its performance to
that of the hand-engineered controller.
To introduce variability in simulation, on every re-
set we sampled the rotation of each block inde-
pendently from a uniform distribution U[−r, r], r ∈
{0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3}.
Similarly, in the real world experiments, on every reset
we randomly rotated each block to one of three orientations:
straight, tilted clockwise, or tilted counterclockwise (tilt was
± 20◦
from original position).
C. Recovering from Control Noise
Due to a host of issues, such as defective hardware
or poorly tuned controller parameters, feedback controllers
might have induced noise. Conventional feedback control
policies are determined a priori and do not adapt their
behavior from data. However, RL methods are known for
their ability to cope with shifting noise distributions and are
capable of recovering from such issues.
In this experiment, we introduce a control noise, including
biased control noise, and demonstrate that residual RL can
still successfully solve the task, while a hand-engineered con-
troller cannot. The control noise follows a normal distribution
and is added to the control output of the system at every step:
u
t = ut + N(μ, σ2
) (6)
To test tolerance to control noise, we set μ = 0 and
vary σ ∈ [0.01, 0.1]. In theory, RL could adapt to a noisy
controller by learning more robust solutions to the task which
are less sensitive to perturbations.
Furthermore, to test tolerance to a biased controller, we
set σ = 0.05 and vary μ ∈ [0, 0.2]. To optimize the task
reward, RL can learn to simply counteract the bias.
D. Sim-to-Real with Residual RL
As an alternative to analytic solutions of real-world control
problems, we can often instead model the forward dynamics
of the problem (ie. a simulator). With access to such a model,
we can ﬁrst ﬁnd a solution to the problem with our possibly
inaccurate model, and then use residual RL to ﬁnd a realistic
control solution in the real world.
In this experiment, we attempt the block insertion task
with the side blocks ﬁxed in place. The hand-engineered
policy πH in this case comes from training a parametric
policy in simulation of the same scenario (with deep RL).
We then use this policy as initialization for residual RL in
the real world.
VI. RESULTS
We trained our method to optimize the insertion process
in simulation as well as on physical hardware. This section
provides the results of our discussed experiments and shows
the functionality of our method.
A. Sample Efﬁciency of Residual RL
First, we compare residual RL and pure RL without
a hand-engineered controller on the insertion task. Fig. 2
shows in simulation and real-world that residual RL achieves
a better ﬁnal performance and requires less samples than
RL alone, both in simulation and on physical hardware.
Unlike residual RL, the pure RL approach needs to learn the
structure of the position control problem from scratch, which
explains the difference in sample efﬁciency. As samples are
expensive to collect in the real world, residual RL is better
suited for solving real-world tasks. Moreover, RL shows a
broader spatial variance during training and needs to explore
a wider set of states compared to residual RL, which can be
potentially dangerous in hardware deployments.
6026
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on October 04,2026 at 07:06:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Misaligned? No Yes
Residual RL 20/20 15/20
Hand-engineered 20/20 2/20
(a)
0K 2K 4K 6K 8K
Timesteps
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Success
Rate
Real World, Misaligned Blocks
Residual RL
Hand Engineered
(b)
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
Timesteps
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Success
Rate
Real World, Control Bias
μ = 0.0
μ = 0.1
μ = 0.2
(c)
Fig. 3: Outcome of our residual RL method in different experiments during the block assembly task in the real-world. Success
rate is recorded manually by human judgment of whether the blocks stayed upright and ended in the correct position. Plot (a)
compares the insertion success of residual RL and hand-designed controller depending on the block orientation during run
time. Plot (b) shows the success rate of the insertion process during training, where on every reset the blocks are randomly
rotated: straight, tilted clockwise, or tilted counterclockwise (± 20◦
) and plot (c) shows the increasing success rate of our
method for biased controllers as well even as control bias increases.
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
Block Rotation Noise
6
5
4
Final
Average
Return
Simulation, Eﬀect of Variation
(a)
0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10
Noise Standard Deviation
8
6
4
Simulation, Eﬀect of Control Noise
(b)
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
Noise Mean
20
15
10
5
Simulation, Eﬀect of Control Bias
Residual RL
Hand-Engineered
(c)
Fig. 4: Simulation results for different experiments. In each plot, the ﬁnal average return obtained by running the method for
various settings of a parameter is shown. Plot (a) shows that residual RL can adjust to noise in the environment caused by
rotation of the blocks in a range of 0 to 0.3 rad. In plot (b), residual RL ﬁnds robust strategies in order to reduce the effect
of control noise, as the ﬁnal average return is not greatly affected by the magnitude of noise. Plot (c) shows that residual
RL can compensate for biased controllers and maintains good performance as control bias increases, while the performance
of the hand-designed controller dramatically deteriorates with higher control bias.
B. Effect of Environment Variation
In previous set of experiments, both standing blocks
were placed in their initial position without any position or
orientation error. In this case, the hand-engineered controller
performs well, as both blocks are placed such that there is
a sufﬁciently large deﬁned gap for insertion. However, once
the initial orientation of the blocks is randomized, the gap
between the blocks and the goal position does not afford
directly inserting from above. Therefore, the hand-engineered
controller struggles to solve the insertion task, succeeding in
only 2/20 trials, while residual RL still succeeds in 15/20
trials. These results are summarized in Fig. 3 (a). Rollouts
from the learned policy are included in 1. In this experiment,
the agent demonstrably learns consistent small corrective
feedback behaviors in order to slightly nudge the blocks in
the right direction without tipping them over, a behavior that
is very difﬁcult to manually specify.
The result of this experiment showcases the strength of
residual RL. Since the human controller speciﬁes the general
trajectory of the optimal policy, environment samples are
required only to learn this corrective feedback behavior. The
real-world learning curve for the experiment in Fig. 3 (b)
shows that this behavior is gradually acquired over the course
of eight thousand samples, which is only about three hours
of real-world training time.
We further studied the effect of the block orientation
changing after every reset in simulation. The results are
shown in Fig. 4 (a). The simulation results show that the per-
formance of the hand-engineered controller decreases as the
block rotation angle increases, whereas our control method
maintains a constant average performance over different
variations.
C. Recovering from Control Noise
In this experiment, we observe that residual RL is able
to cope with actuator noise, including biased actuator noise.
Quantitative results for simulation are shown in Fig. 4 (b)
and (c). In Fig. 4 (c) our method keeps the average return
constant and correct for biased controllers even as control
bias increases, whereas the hand-engineered controller can-
not compensate biased input and its performance deteriorates
as control bias increases. The same applies for adding control
noise to the control output as shown in Fig. 4 (b).
6027
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on October 04,2026 at 07:06:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
For the hardware experiments, only biased actuator noise
is investigated. These results are shown in Fig. 3 (c). These
learning curves show that even as more control bias is intro-
duced, training in the real world proceeds without signiﬁcant
issues. This result suggests the potential for RL to address
practical issues in automation such as sensor drift.
D. Sim-to-Real with Residual RL
The result of the sim-to-real experiment is shown in
Fig. 5. In this experiment, each setting was run with three
random seeds. Adding policy initialization from simulation
signiﬁcantly speeds up both RL and residual RL. In particu-
lar, residual RL with policy initialization from simulation
successfully solves the task extremely quickly: in under
one thousand timesteps of environment interaction. This
method poses a highly sample efﬁcient, practical way to
solve robotics problems with difﬁcult contact dynamics.
VII. RELATED WORK
Reinforcement learning for robotics holds the promise of
greater autonomy and reliability, which could be vital to
improving our manufacturing processes beyond its current
limitations. RL methods have been difﬁcult to apply in
robotics because of sample efﬁciency, safety, and stability
issues. Still, RL has been used to allow robots to learn tasks
such as playing table tennis [6], swinging up a cartpole
and balancing a unicycle [7], grasping [8], [9], opening a
door [10], and general manipulation tasks [11], [12]. RL,
particularly deep RL, tends to be data-hungry; even learning
simple tasks can require many hours of interaction. To bring
these methods into factories and warehouses, they must be
able to consistently solve complex tasks, multi-step tasks.
One way to enable these methods to solve these complex
tasks is to introduce prior human knowledge into the learning
system, as our method does.
Prior work in RL has incorporated human prior knowledge
for solving tasks in various ways. One such way is reward
shaping [13], where additional rewards auxiliary to the real
objective are included in order to guide the agent towards
the desired behavior. Reward shaping can effectively encode
a policy. For example, to train an agent to perform block
stacking, each step can be encoded into the reward [14].
Fig. 5: Real-world block insertion results using residual RL
for sim-to-real transfer. “Sim” indicates that the real-world
policy was initialized by reinforcement learning in simula-
tion. Residual RL with simulation initialization successfully
solves the task with little environment experience required.
Often, intensive reward shaping is key for RL to succeed at
a task and prior work has even considered reward shaping as
part of the learning system [15]. Reward shaping in order to
tune agent behavior is a very manual process and recovering
a good policy with reward shaping can be as difﬁcult as
specifying the policy itself. Hence, in our method we allow
for human speciﬁcation of both rewards and policies—
whichever might be more practical for a particular task.
Further work has incorporated more specialized human
knowledge into RL systems. One approach is to use tra-
jectory planners in RL in order to solve robotics tasks [16].
However, since the method optimizes trajectory following in-
stead of the task reward, generalization can be difﬁcult when
aspects of the environment change. Other work has focused
on human feedback [17], [18], [19], [20], [21] to inform
the agent about rewards or to encourage safety. However, in
many robotics tasks, providing enough information about the
task through incremental human feedback is difﬁcult.
Another way to include prior knowledge in RL is through
demonstrations [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27]. Demonstra-
tions can substantially simplify the exploration problem as
the agent begins training having already received examples of
high-reward transitions and therefore knows where to explore
[28]. However, providing demonstrations requires humans
to be able to teleoperate the robot to perform the task. In
contrast, our method only requires a conventional controller
for motion, which ships with most robots.
Prior knowledge can also be induced through neural
network architecture choices. Deep residual networks with
additive residual blocks achieved state of the art results
in many computer vision tasks by enabling training of
extremely deep networks [29]. In RL, structured control nets
showed improvement on several tasks by splitting the policy
into a linear module and a non-linear module [30]. Prior work
in adaptive ﬂight control has also considered compensating
linearized controllers with neural networks [31]. Most closely
related to our work, residual policy learning concurrently
and independently explores training a residual policy in
the context of simulated long-horizon, sparse-reward tasks
with environment variation and sensor noise [32]. Our work
instead focuses on achieving practical real-world training of
contact-intensive tasks.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper we study the combination of conventional
feedback control methods with deep RL. We presented a
control method that utilizes conventional feedback control
along with RL to solve complicated manipulation tasks
involving friction and contacts with unstable objects. We
believe this approach can accelerate learning of many tasks,
especially those where the control problem can be solved in
large part by prior knowledge but requires some model-free
reasoning to solve perfectly. Our results demonstrate that the
combination of conventional feedback control and RL can
circumvent the disadvantages of both and provide a sample
efﬁcient controller that can cope with contact dynamics.
6028
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on October 04,2026 at 07:06:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
REFERENCES
[1] U. Kannengiesser, R. Heininger, L. Billy, P. Terpak, M. Neubauer,
C. Stary, D. Majoe, A. Totter, and D. Bonaldi, Lot-Size One Produc-
tion, 01 2017.
[2] S. Fujimoto, H. van Hoof, and D. Meger, “Addressing Func-
tion Approximation Error in Actor-Critic Methods,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.09477, 2018.
[3] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez,
Y. Tassa, D. Silver, and D. Wierstra, “Continuous control with deep
reinforcement learning,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2016.
[4] V. Pong, S. Gu, M. Dalal, and S. Levine, “Temporal Difference
Models: Model-Free Deep RL For Model-Based Control,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
[5] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa, “MuJoCo: A physics engine
for model-based control,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012, pp. 5026–5033.
[6] J. Peters, K. Mülling, and Y. Altün, “Relative Entropy Policy Search,”
in AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2010, pp. 1607–1612.
[7] M. P. Deisenroth and C. E. Rasmussen, “PILCO: A model-based and
data-efﬁcient approach to policy search,” in International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), 2011, pp. 465–472.
[8] L. Pinto, J. Davidson, R. Sukthankar, and A. Gupta, “Robust
Adversarial Reinforcement Learning,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
[9] S. Levine, P. Pastor, A. Krizhevsky, and D. Quillen, “Learning
Hand-Eye Coordination for Robotic Grasping with Deep Learning
and Large-Scale Data Collection,” International Journal of Robotics
Research, 2017.
[10] S. Gu, E. Holly, T. Lillicrap, and S. Levine, “Deep Reinforcement
Learning for Robotic Manipulation with Asynchronous Off-Policy
Updates,” IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2017.
[11] S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P. Abbeel, “End-to-End Training
of Deep Visuomotor Policies,” Journal of Machine Learning Research
(JMLR), vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1334–1373, 2016.
[12] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft Actor-Critic:
Off-Policy Maximum Entropy Deep Reinforcement Learning with a
Stochastic Actor,” in International Conference on Machine Learning,
2018.
[13] A. Y. Ng, D. Harada, and S. Russell, “Policy invariance under
reward transformations: Theory and application to reward shaping,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 1999.
[14] I. Popov, N. Heess, T. Lillicrap, R. Hafner, G. Barth-maron,
M. Vecerik, T. Lampe, Y. Tassa, T. Erez, M. Riedmiller, and
M. R. Deepmind, “Data-efﬁcient Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Dexterous Manipulation,” CoRR, vol. abs/1704.0, 2017.
[15] C. Daniel, M. Viering, J. Metz, O. Kroemer, and J. Peters, “Active
Reward Learning,” in Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2014.
[16] G. Thomas, M. Chien, A. Tamar, J. A. Ojea, and P. Abbeel, “Learning
Robotic Assembly from CAD,” in IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2018.
[17] R. Loftin, J. Macglashan, B. Peng, M. E. Taylor, M. L. Littman,
J. Huang, and D. L. Roberts, “A Strategy-Aware Technique for Learn-
ing Behaviors from Discrete Human Feedback,” in AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2014, pp. 937–943.
[18] W. Saunders, G. Sastry, A. Stuhlmüller, and O. Evans, “Trial
without Error: Towards Safe Reinforcement Learning via Human
Intervention,” in International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), 2018.
[19] L. Torrey and M. E. Taylor, “Teaching on a Budget: Agents Advising
Agents in Reinforcement Learning,” in International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), 2013.
[20] J. Frank, S. Mannor, and D. Precup, “Reinforcement Learning in the
Presence of Rare Events,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), 2008.
[21] P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. B. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and
D. Amodei, “Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2017.
[22] J. Peters and S. Schaal, “Reinforcement learning of motor skills with
policy gradients,” Neural Networks, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 682–697,
2008.
[23] J. Kober and J. Peter, “Policy search for motor primitives in
robotics,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS), vol. 97, 2008, pp. 83–117.
[24] A. Rajeswaran, V. Kumar, A. Gupta, J. Schulman, E. Todorov, and
S. Levine, “Learning Complex Dexterous Manipulation with Deep
Reinforcement Learning and Demonstrations,” in Robotics: Science
and Systems, 2018.
[25] T. Hester, M. Vecerik, O. Pietquin, M. Lanctot, T. Schaul,
B. Piot, D. Horgan, J. Quan, A. Sendonaris, G. Dulac-Arnold,
I. Osband, J. Agapiou, J. Z. Leibo, and A. Gruslys, “Learning from
Demonstrations for Real World Reinforcement Learning,” in AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2018.
[26] M. Večerı́k, T. Hester, J. Scholz, F. Wang, O. Pietquin, B. Piot,
N. Heess, T. Rothörl, T. Lampe, and M. Riedmiller, “Leveraging
Demonstrations for Deep Reinforcement Learning on Robotics
Problems with Sparse Rewards,” CoRR, vol. abs/1707.0, 2017.
[27] A. Nair, B. Mcgrew, M. Andrychowicz, W. Zaremba, and
P. Abbeel, “Overcoming Exploration in Reinforcement Learning with
Demonstrations,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2018.
[28] K. Subramanian, C. L. Isbell, and A. L. Thomaz, “Exploration
from Demonstration for Interactive Reinforcement Learning,” in
International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems (AAMAS), 2016.
[29] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep Residual Learning for
Image Recognition,” in Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
[30] M. Srouji, J. Zhang, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Structured Control Nets
for Deep Reinforcement Learning,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
[31] E. Johnson and A. Calise, “Pseudo-Control Hedging: A New Method
For Adaptive Control,” in Advances in Navigation Guidance and
Control Technology Workshop, 2000.
[32] T. Silver, K. Allen, J. Tenenbaum, and L. Kaelbling, “Residual Policy
Learning,” dec 2018.
6029
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on October 04,2026 at 07:06:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
