=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 39, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2023 3705
Impedance Learning for Human-Guided Robots in
Contact With Unknown Environments
Xueyan Xing , Etienne Burdet , Member, IEEE, Weiyong Si, Chenguang Yang , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Yanan Li , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Previous works have developed impedance control to
increase safety and improve performance in contact tasks, where
the robot is in physical interaction with either an environment
or a human user. This article investigates impedance learning
for a robot guided by a human user while interacting with an
unknown environment. We develop automatic adaptation of robot
impedance parameters to reduce the effort required to guide the
robot through the environment, while guaranteeing interaction
stability. For nonrepetitive tasks, this novel adaptive controller can
attenuate disturbances by learning appropriate robot impedance.
Implemented as an iterative learning controller, it can compen-
sate for position dependent disturbances in repeated movements.
Experiments demonstrate that the robot controller can, in both
repetitiveandnonrepetitivetasks:first,identifyandcompensatefor
the interaction, second, ensure both contact stability (with reduced
tracking error) and maneuverability (with less driving effort of
the human user) in contact with real environments, and third, is
superior to previous velocity-based impedance adaptation control
methods.
Index Terms—Human–robot–environment interaction control,
impedance control, learning control.
NOMENCLATURE
x Position of the robot end-effector.
xe Rest position of the environment.
d Environmental disturbance.
Manuscript received 23 December 2022; accepted 28 April 2023. Date of
publication 23 June 2023; date of current version 4 October 2023. This work
was supported in part by the U.K. EPSRC under Grant EP/T006951/1, in part
by the (Chinese) State Key Laboratory of Robotics and Systems (HIT) under
Grant SKLRS-2022-KF-16, and in part by the European Commission under
Grant ICT-871803 CONBOTS. This paper was recommended for publication
by Associate Editor D. Lee and Editor P. R. Giordano upon evaluation of the
reviewers’ comments. (Corresponding author: Yanan Li.)
This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval of all
ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was granted by Sciences and
Technology Cross-Schools Research Ethics Committee of Sussex University,
and the UWE Faculty Research Ethics Committee under Application No.
ER/YL557/1, and FET-2122-59, respectively.
Xueyan Xing and Yanan Li are with the Department of Engineer-
ing and Design, University of Sussex, BN1 9RH Brighton, U.K. (e-mail:
xx92@sussex.ac.uk; yl557@sussex.ac.uk).
Etienne Burdet is with the Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College
of Science, Technology and Medicine, SW7 2AZ London, U.K. (e-mail: ebur-
det@ic.ac.uk).
Weiyong Si and Chenguang Yang are with the Bristol Robotics Laboratory,
University of the West of England, BS16 1QY Bristol, U.K. (e-mail: weiy-
ong.si@uwe.ac.uk; cyang@ieee.org).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2023.3281483.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TRO.2023.3281483
K, Kv, Ke Coefficientsofthedisturbanceandcontrol
matrix.
Ks, Kvs, kps, xes Spatial form of K, Kv, kp, xe.
Af , Ad, Ac Parameters of the proposed adaptive
impedance learning method.
v Velocity of the robot end-effector.
V Lyapunov function of the system (for sta-
bility analysis).
E Total tracking error.
M, B, g Inertia, Coriolis coefficient, and gravity of
the robot.
xh, xr Reference positions of the human and
robot.
u Robot control input.
K̂, K̂v, k̂p Estimations of K, Kv, kp, where
kp = −Kxe.
K̂s, K̂vs, k̂ps Estimations of Ks, Kvs, kps.
A, Av, Ap, Λ Parameters of the proposed iterative
impedance learning method.
ξ Integration variable of space (for stability
analysis).
aj, bj, cj Parameters of the velocity-based adapta-
tion in (24).
PE Capability of the method in terms of con-
tact stability.
Kh, Khv Stiffness and viscosity matrices of the hu-
man arm.
fh Interaction force between the human and
robot.
eh, e Tracking errors of the human and robot.
Ti ith iteration period for repetitive tasks.
T Maximum iteration period for repetitive
tasks.
η, μ Parameters of the improved Λ.
σ Integration variable of time (for stability
analysis).
J Index of driving effort of the human user.
PF Capability of the method in terms of ma-
neuverability.
I. INTRODUCTION
VARIOUS robotic applications, such as (tele)operating a
microrobot, demand a robot to be guided by a human
while interacting with the environment. Most existing robotic
1552-3098 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
3706 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 39, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2023
interaction control schemes focus on achieving an effective in-
teractioneitherwiththehumanoperator,orwithanenvironment.
However, duringtheexecutionof manyhuman–robot interaction
tasks, the robot may concurrently interact with an environment,
for example, during human-guided tooling. This interaction may
destabilize the movement, affect task performance, and fatigue
the human operator. Our vision to avoid these shortcomings is
for a robot to understand the human intention, while learning
to compensate for identified reproducible interaction dynamics
during movement.
When a human user guides a robot to complete a tooling task,
such as cutting, polishing, or drilling, they need to exert a force
on the robot to move it along the planned trajectory and achieve
satisfying tooling performance. For instance, as a human user
carries out a carving task, they need to apply a certain force to
manipulate the blade along a desired trajectory. If the engraved
plate is of hard texture, there will be a large resistive disturbance
that will degrade the carving performance. If the human user
wants to maintain the carving quality, more effort is needed to
overcome the unknown disturbance. In this case, a robot that
complies with human movement while concurrently attenuating
environmental disturbance is required.
To analyze the interaction of the human operator with the
robot and its environment, we define maneuverability as the
degree of difficulty to guide the robot for completing a task
in the presence of environmental perturbations. The more easily
the human operator can guide the robot, the higher the maneu-
verability. We also define contact stability as the capability for
the robot to ensure good task performance despite environmental
perturbations. The robot should both i) allow the human operator
to easily move and flexibly operate the robot, thus yielding high
maneuverability, and ii) complete the task with a small error
in the presence of perturbation from the environment, such as
vibration due to a nonhomogeneous material and undesirable
friction, i.e., the contact stability has to be guaranteed. Usu-
ally, the contact stability is guaranteed at the expense of the
maneuverability, or vice versa. When the human user tries to
improve their performance, i.e., to reduce the tracking error,
they need more effort to compensate for the disturbance, which
will result in decreasing maneuverability. Conversely, with less
human control effort, the task performance will be deteriorated
due to the negative effects of the disturbance. In other words,
maneuverability and contact stability are hard to ensure concur-
rently. Our goal is to develop an interaction controller that makes
robots able to interact with their environment, while offering
both high maneuverability and contact stability to the human
operator.
A. Previous Works in Human–Robot Interaction
How to design a robot controller for intuitive and efficient
human–robot interaction is a prevalent research topic in the
robotics field. Robots that interact with humans to perform
their functions include rehabilitation robots, robotic exoskele-
tons, collaborative robots (cobots) for micro manipulation and
industrial assembly, and semiautonomous vehicles. Impedance
control is often used on these contact robots to yield a compliant
interaction of a robot with its human operator.
Facing uncertain human behaviors, a number of works es-
timate the human impedance or intention to dynamically ad-
just the robot’s impedance parameters for efficient and stable
interaction. For instance, it has been proposed to regulate the
robot impedance using muscle activity measured with surface
electromyography, although the underlying control is limited
by the large signal variability and neural constraints [1], [2].
To address these limitations, several approaches used the force
and position information of the human limb, which can be
directly measured by sensors, to infer their impedance and adjust
the robot’s impedance correspondingly [3], [4]. Other works
estimate intention or characteristics of the human partner, e.g.,
trajectory in [5] or human impedance in [6] and [7] for adjust-
ment of the robot’s impedance. Alternatively, a velocity-related
heuristic rule scheme has been considered in [4] and [8] to adjust
robot impedance, rather than relying on the human partner’s
behavior. In addition, several works considered that human
movements obey a certain probability distribution that can be
identified to infer their intention [9]. Based on time-series data,
the motion intention was estimated using the sparse Bayesian
learning method in [10], and an adaptive impedance control
algorithm was developed for effective human–robot collabo-
ration. Instead of adjusting the robot’s impedance, the robot’s
reference trajectory can be updated to achieve efficient human–
robot interaction [11]. A review of human–robot interaction
control can be found in [12]. However, previous works do not
explicitly consider concurrent interactions between the robot,
human operator, and environment.
B. Existing Works on Robot–Environment Interaction
Contact tooling tasks by definition involve a desired inter-
action between the robot and the environment. Control theory
has been used to consider robot–environment interaction sta-
bility, and to develop impedance adaptation. In [13], [14], and
[15], the interaction force between the robot and the human
was considered as an environmental force, where neural and
iterative learning controls were used to mitigate its negative
effect. Different from [13], [14], and [15], the adaptive control
strategy in [16] could generate the desired interaction force
between robot and environment by adjusting the feedforward
force, impedance, and trajectory of the robot. Reinforcement
learning approaches have also been proposed to determine the
optimal impedance parameters of the robot controller to achieve
desired robot–environment interaction performance [17], [18],
[19], [20]. A reward function including contact information,
e.g., the interaction force, was used to determine the optimal
impedance parameters of the robot controller to achieve desired
robot–environment interaction performance [21]. Fuzzy logic
controllers have also been developed for impedance adaptation
oftherobot. Basedonafuzzyneuralnetworklearningalgorithm,
an adaptive controller was designed in [22] for adjusting the
impedance parameters of the robot so as to produce smooth
control even during transitions from free movement to contact.
However, the controllers designed in [13], [14], [15], [16],
[17], [18], [19], [20], [21], and [22] do not consider a human
operator.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
XING et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING FOR HUMAN-GUIDED ROBOTS IN CONTACT WITH UNKNOWN ENVIRONMENTS 3707
Fig. 1. Human–robot–environment interaction: A robot is guided by a human
operator while in physical contact with an environment.
C. Contributions of This Article on
Human–Robot–Environment Interaction
Different from the aforementioned works that considered
either the interaction between robot and environment, or the
interaction between robot and human, we will consider here
both the human operator and the environment. We will design
a robot controller that automatically infers the intention of the
human and adapts to an uncertain environment by learning the
resulting impedance to improve the task performance. It is not a
simple combination of two controllers for robot–environment
interaction and human–robot interaction, as the two control
objectives can be contradictory, leading to a conflicting trade-
off between maneuverability and contact stability as discussed
above. Our idea is to maintain the robot’s maneuverability by
inferring the human intent while only introducing additional
impedance to deal with the environmental disturbance and, thus,
ensurecontactstability.Asaresult,boththemaneuverabilityand
the contact stability can be ensured during the human–robot–
environment interaction, and the conflict between the human
effort and the task performance is addressed.
The designed impedance learning strategy can be applied to
both nonrepetitive tasks, such as engraving or drawing, in the
form of adaptive learning, and repetitive tasks, such as grinding
or polishing, in the form of iterative learning. In the collaborative
tasks considered in this article, the robot is guided by the human
user that assists them to complete a task in the presence of
uncertain environmental disturbances. As illustrated by Fig. 1,
the human user holds the robot and their interaction force can be
measured by a force sensor. Simultaneously, the robot interacts
with the environment for a certain tooling task. As the interaction
force between the robot and the environment is typically subject
to significant noise, it is not measured by a force sensor. Instead,
due to repetitive interaction and periodicity of the environmental
parameters, the disturbance from the environment can be learned
by the robot.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
formulates dynamics of and issues with the human-guided
robot in contact with the environment. An adaptive variable
impedance control is developed in Section III for nonrepetitive
tasks. Section IV presents an iterative control method with
variable impedance learning for repetitive tasks considering
position dependent disturbances. An experiment to test the al-
gorithm’s ability to identify a known virtual environment and
yield stable interaction behavior is described in Section V.
Section VI presents an experiment to test the effectiveness of
the proposed impedance learning scheme in interaction with
real environments. Finally, Section VII concludes this article
and analyzes the advantage of the proposed control method by
comparing with the existing velocity-based adaptation method.
The variables used in this article are listed in the Nomenclature.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
A. Dynamics of Human–Robot–Environment Interaction
We aim to design a controller for a human-guided robot that
can stably interact with an environment. The dynamics of the
n-degree of freedom (DoF) human-guided robot can be modeled
as
M ẍ + B ẋ + g = fh + d + u (1)
where x = [x1, . . . , xn]T
∈ Rn
is the position vector of the
end-effector, M ∈ Rn×n
is the inertia matrix of the robot,
B ∈ Rn×n
is the positive definite matrix related to the Coriolis
force, g ∈ Rn
is the gravity force on the robot, fh ∈ Rn
is the
vector of the measured interaction force signals, d ∈ Rn
is the
disturbanceduetotheinteractionwithanunknownenvironment,
and u ∈ Rn
is the robot command vector. In the model in
(1), parameters of the robot M, B, g are time-varying and
state-related, but their arguments are omitted in this article to
facilitate the readability.
Inthisarticle,thehumanforcefh isexpectedtobeminimized,
even with an environmental disturbance d. While both fh and
d are external forces on the robot controller, fh is considered
“desirable” as it indicates the human’s planned trajectory, and d
is “undesirable” as it may cause instability.
The interaction force can be modeled as [23]
fh = M ẍh + B ẋh − Kh eh − Khv ėh, eh = x − xh
(2)
where xh ∈ Rn
is the desired position vector of the human that
is unknown to the robot, Kh ∈ Rn×n
and Khv ∈ Rn×n
are
stiffness and viscosity matrices of the human arm, and eh ∈ Rn
is the tracking error between xh and x. The first two terms of
(2) correspond to the feedforward force to compensate for the
systemdynamicsandthelasttwotermstomuscleviscoelasticity.
Notice that (2) is not used in the following robot controller
design, but only for analysis purpose. If the robot is without
disturbance and only with gravity compensation, i.e., d = 0 and
u = g, then combining (1,2) yields
M ëh + (B + Khv)ėh + Kh eh = 0 (3)
which shows that the robot can stably follow xh corresponding
to the human’s motion intent and the instability in practice is
largely caused by the environmental disturbance.
Since the human force can guide the robot to the desired
position without disturbance and control, under such an ideal
case, the robot passively follows the desired human trajectory
as expected and eh ≈ 0. Then, using (2), we have
M ẍh + B ẋh = fh . (4)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
3708 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 39, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2023
If we define the reference position vector of the robot as xr ∈
Rn
, replacing xh in (4) with xr yields
M ẍr + B ẋr = fh . (5)
With (5), the reference trajectory of the robot xr is available for
the impedance control designed in the following sections.
B. Stability Analysis for Human–Robot–Environment
Interaction
This section analyzes the system stability to develop an
impedance learning controller for an ideal case with measurable
disturbance. Let us consider a general viscoelastic model of the
environment:
d = K(x − xe) + Kv ẋ (6)
where K ∈ Rn×n
and Kv ∈ Rn×n
are the coefficients of the
disturbance and xe ∈ Rn
is the rest position of the environment.
When there is no external disturbance and the robotic control
is designed only for gravity compensation, i.e., u = g and d =
0, according to (1)
M ẍ + B ẋ = fh (7)
in which fh is driving the robot toward xh as shown in (4) and
the interaction system is stable if (7) holds.
If only the gravity compensation is considered in the robotic
controller, considering the system in (1) with u = g and the
disturbance d in (6), the model of the human-guided robot can
be rewritten as
M ẍ + B̄ ẋ + C̄ x + ā = fh (8)
where
B̄ = B − Kv , C̄ = −K , ā = K xe. (9)
It is clear that when the disturbance is resistive to the robot
movement, i.e., the matrices K and Kv are positive definite,
the human-guided robot in (8) could become unstable in the
presence of large disturbances because of the undesired terms
B̄, C̄ x, and ā in (9), such that more human effort is needed
for a stable contact. Therefore, to achieve a stable contact with
the environment while maintaining the robot’s maneuverability,
a robotic controller is required to attenuate the effect of the
disturbance.
According to the model in (1), if the environmental distur-
bance d is measurable, a robot controller with gravity compen-
sation can be designed as
u = −d + g (10)
such that (7) holds even with the disturbance. This would enable
the human to use little effort to ensure the contact stability
and guide the robot. In practical operation, the environmental
disturbance is hard to be accurately estimated. In the following
two sections, an impedance controller is designed based on
the human-guided robot model in (1), which does not require
knowledge of d and xh to guarantee the contact stability and
the robot maneuverability.
III. IMPEDANCE CONTROL DESIGN FOR NONREPETITIVE TASKS
For the nonrepetitive task considered in this section, the
coefficients K and Kv of the disturbance in (6) and the rest
position of the environment xe are constant. Then, an adaptive
impedance control is designed as
u = −K̂ x − K̂v ẋ − k̂p − Keė + g (11)
with impedance learning laws
˙
K̂ = ė xT
Af ,
˙
K̂v = ė ẋT
Ad ,
˙
k̂p = Ac ė (12)
where e ∈ Rn
is the tracking error of the robot
e = x − xr (13)
and Af , Ad, Ac, Ke ∈ Rn×n
are positive definite diagonal
matrices.
Equation (12) can be used to compute K̂, K̂v, and k̂p for
the control of (11). For example, K̂ can be computed from
K̂(t + Δt) = ėxT
Af Δt + K̂(t) using Euler integration with
a predefined initial value K̂(0), where Δt denotes the sampling
time. In (12), we know that K̂, K̂v, and k̂p update depending
on the variation speed of the tracking error ė, and the position
x and velocity ẋ of the system. Since the disturbance d in (6)
can be rewritten as d = Kx − Kxe + Kv ẋ, it is related to
the position x, the velocity ẋ of the system, as well as the rest
position of the environment xe. As a result, the controller will
update its three parameters according to the current tracking
performance, which is indicated by ė, and the current degree of
disturbance, which is indicated by x and ẋ. Besides, according
to the backward difference method, ẋr can be represented as
ẋr =
xr(t) − xr(t − Δt)
Δt
,
where Δt is the sampling time, and thus,
ẍr =
xr(t) − 2xr(t − Δt) + xr(t − 2Δt)
(Δt)2
according to [24]. By substituting the expressions of
ẋr and ẍr into (5), the reference trajectory of the
robot xr(t) used in (13) can be updated using xr(t) =
[(Δt)2
fh − Mxr(t − 2Δt) + (BΔt + 2M)xr(t − Δt)]
×(M + BΔt)−1
.
Substituting (11) into (1) yields
M ẍ + (B + K̂v)ẋ + K̂ x + Keė + k̂p = fh + d (14)
which can be rewritten as
M ẍ + B̌ ẋ + Č x + Keė + ǎ = fh + d (15)
where
B̌ ≡ B + K̂v , Č ≡ K̂ , ǎ ≡ k̂p . (16)
From (16), it is clear that the impedance matrices B̌, Č, ǎ
are regulated according to the variation of the disturbance d
with learning laws in (12). When K̂x + K̂vẋ + k̂p ≃ Kx +
Kvẋ − K xe, (7) holds with an additional assistive force Keė
provided by the robot such that the human can guide the robot
with fh free from the disturbance.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
XING et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING FOR HUMAN-GUIDED ROBOTS IN CONTACT WITH UNKNOWN ENVIRONMENTS 3709
Fig. 2. Control block diagram of the human-guided robot for nonrepetitive
and repetitive tasks.
Using (5), (6), (11), eq. (1) can be rewritten as
M ë + (B + Ke) ė = K̃ x + K̃v ẋ + k̃p (17)
where K̃, K̃v ∈ Rn×n
, and k̃p ∈ Rn
are defined as
K̃ = K − K̂, K̃v = Kv − K̂v, k̃p = kp − k̂p (18)
while kp = −K xe.
Using these notations, we can formulate Theorem 1: For
an n-DoF human-guided robot used in a nonrepetitive task,
the adaptive impedance control strategy in (11) and (12) can
eliminate the adverse effect of the disturbance d and regulate
the robot behavior so that the stability of the closed-loop system
in (17), (18) is guaranteed in the presence of d. The proof of
Theorem 1 is provided in Appendix A. 
Theorem 1 indicates that the disturbance can be learned using
our adaptive impedance control scheme, thus the controller in
(11) enables (7) to hold for the closed-loop interaction system.
As impedance learning in (12) regulates the robot impedance
to compensate for the effect of the disturbance during the inter-
action, the human user does not need to overcome the contact
instability caused by the disturbance, and the effort to steer the
robot is reduced. The abovementioned control process can be
found in Fig. 2.
In (11), u is derived by analyzing the stability of the disturbed
human–robot–environment interaction system based on Lya-
punov’s stability theory [25]. We first need to select a Lyapunov
function of the system [V in (32) in Appendix A] that includes
the tracking error and the estimation error of the disturbance
parameters that we want to minimize, then u is designed to
make the controlled system stable through V̇ ≤ 0.
For the designed control u, the initial values of the estimated
control parameters in (11), K̂(0), K̂v(0), k̂p(0), affect the
transient performance but not the steady-state performance, and
they are typically initialized as zero. However, the learning
parameters Af , Ad, Ac in (12) should be manually tuned to
be large enough to provide adequate convergence speed of the
controlled system.
IV. ITERATIVE IMPEDANCE CONTROL FOR HUMAN-GUIDED
ROBOT IN REPETITIVE TASKS
When the robot performs a repetitive task, the environment
has spatial periodicity, thus, the disturbance can be considered
as a function of the position as discussed in [26]. To further
elaborate, instead of constant matrices, coefficients of the
disturbance are spatially periodic, i.e., their values are the same
for the same position in different iterations. We modify here the
adaptive impedance control proposed in Section III for repetitive
tasks, making it suitable for space-related disturbances with
varying coefficients. The subscript s is used for space-related
variables and time-related variables are without s. The subscript
i of a variable denotes its iteration number.
In the ith iteration, the spacial form of the environmental
disturbance di in (6) is written as
di = Ks(xi − xes) + Kvs ẋi (19)
where Ks, Kvs ∈ Rn×n
, and xes ∈ Rn
are the spatial form
of K, Kv, and xe, respectively, which satisfy Ks,i =
Ks,i−1, Kvs,i = Kvs,i−1, xes,i = xes,i−1.
Based on the disturbance in (19), the robot control u is
redesigned as
ui = −K̂i xi − K̂v,i ẋi − k̂p,i − Keėi + g (20)
where the control parameter matrix Ke ∈ Rn×n
keeps the
same for each iteration, and impedance parameter matrices
K̂i ∈ Rn×n
, K̂v,i ∈ Rn×n
, and k̂p,i ∈ Rn
are updated in time
as
K̂i =

K̂i−1 + ėi xT
i AΛ for t ∈ [0, Ti]
K̂i−1 for t ∈ (Ti , T ]
K̂v,i =

K̂v,i−1 + ėi ẋT
i Av Λ for t ∈ [0, Ti]
K̂v,i−1 for t ∈ (Ti , T ]
k̂p,i =

k̂p,i−1 + Ap Λ ėi for t ∈ [0, Ti]
k̂p,i−1 for t ∈ (Ti , T ]
(21)
where A, Av, and Ap are Rn×n
diagonal matrices with pos-
itive constant elements, Ti ∈ [0, T ] is the actual learning time
of the ith iteration, T is the maximum iteration period, Λ =
diag{λ1
· · · λn
} ∈ Rn×n
in which λj
= |vj
|
−1
and vj
∈ R is
the current robot velocity along the jth dimension, j = 1, . . . , n.
In traditional iterative learning control, a fixed iteration period
is needed to ensure system stability. However, humans never
repeat a movement with exactly the same time duration [27]. In
our proposed method, the learning laws in (21) are designed as
piecewise functions. Based on this, we use the method in [15]
and introduce Λ to deal with the varying iteration period.
When the current velocity increases, the learning speed will
correspondingly decrease due to the decrease of Λ, so that the
possible spatial inconsistency caused by the varying velocity can
be corrected with our proposed update laws, and the stability
of the human–robot–environment interaction system can be
guaranteed. With the maximum iteration period T, the controller
updates its coefficients for t ∈ [0, Ti] and stops updating for the
rest of the duration since there is no valuable information to be
learned. T could be theoretically set to be large enough to cover
all possibilities so that the actual learning time Ti can eventually
achieve it in the sense of lim
i→∞
Ti = T [15], [28]. However, if T is
too large, the control period will be correspondingly extended,
which will reduce the control efficiency. Therefore, T should
be determined according to the task execution time. In practice,
T can be set slightly larger than the prescribed movement time
(e.g., as 4’30” for a 4’ planned duration) to guarantee that the
task can be completed.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
3710 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 39, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2023
Fig. 3. Experimental setup with H-MAN robot to test the algorithm on a virtual
environment interaction.
Substituting (5), (6), (20) into (1) yields
M ëi + (B + Ke) ėi = K̃i xi + K̃v,i ẋi + k̃p,i (22)
where K̃i, K̃v,i ∈ Rn×n
, and k̃p,i ∈ Rn
are defined as
K̃i = Ki − K̂i, K̃v,i = Kv,i − K̂v,i, k̃p,i = kp,i − k̂p,i
(23)
where kp,i = −Ki xe,i.
With above-mentioned equations, we can formulate Theorem
2: For the n-DoF human-guided robot described by (1) in
repetitive tasks, the iterative impedance control strategy in (20)
with impedance learning laws in (21) can guarantee the stability
of the closed-loop system in (22) and (23) in the presence of
environmental disturbance, i.e., (7) is satisfied with the proposed
control. The proof of this theorem is presented in Appendix B,
where the robot control is first designed to be space-related to
conform with (19) and then transformed to time domain for
implementation.
The block diagram of the resulting human-guided robot con-
trol for repetitive tasks is shown in Fig. 2. In order to avoid
K̂, K̂v, and k̂p becoming too large when the robot veloc-
ity is close to zero, λj
defined in (21) can be revised with
λj
=

|vj
|
−1
, if |vj
| ≥ μ
(|vj
| + η)
−1
, if |vj
| < μ
, where a constant η is added
to λj
when |vj
| is less than a positive constant μ.
V. CONTROL VALIDATION WITH H-MAN ROBOT
To test the ability of the proposed impedance controller to
identify the environmental disturbances and stably compensate
for it, an experiment was implemented on a planar H-MAN robot
with a virtual, software designed disturbance. The experiment
was approved by the Sciences and Technology Cross-Schools
Research Ethics Committee of Sussex University, U.K. (refer-
ence number ER/YL557/1). Six human subjects without known
sensorimotor impairment were recruited, who all gave their
informed consent prior to participating. International units are
used in the following, unless specified.
The experimental setup with the planar H-MAN robot is
shown in Fig. 3. A graphical user interface (GUI) is designed to
displaythetargettrajectoryandthecursorindicatingthehandle’s
position. In the experiment, the human operator holds the handle
and guides the robot to track the target trajectory with the cursor
on the GUI. The H-MAN robot is equipped with an ATI Mini 40
force/torque sensor at the handle. Since the virtual disturbance
is introduced in software as a part of the control input of the
robot (instead of stemming from interaction with a physical
environment), the force measured by the load cell is only from
the human.
To evaluate our proposed adaptive impedance control, the
following three control conditions were compared.
1) Control off: The robot control was 0.
2) Velocity-based: The velocity-based impedance adaptation
proposed in [4]
uj = − min

aj e−bj |ẋj |
, cj

ẋj , aj, bj, cj > 0 (24)
where j = 1, 2 stands for x or y axis.
3) Impedance learning: The proposed control method with
impedance learning was used.
Each subject was instructed on how to use the H-MAN robot,
and then practiced the task. Recording began when the subject
felt confident in performing the task. Each subject carried out
five trials in each of the three control conditions, whose order
was unknown to them.
Sections V-A–C present the results of a representative subject,
and the overall performance of the six subjects is described in
Section V-D.
A. Nonrepetitive Task
In the nonrepetitive task, the target displayed on the GUI
moved in a circular trajectory [10 cos( π
4.5 t) 10 sin( π
4.5 t)]T
cm.
One trial consisted of tracking this trajectory once. The
disturbance was set as d = [dx dy]T
= [20 x1 + 4 ẋ1
20 x2 + 4 ẋ2]T
N.
The velocity-based control in (24) was implemented with
a1 = a2 = 500, b1 = b2 = 3, and c1 = c2 = 50. Impedance
learning was implemented using the controller in (11),
(12) with parameters Ke = 0.1 I2, Af = 0.5 I2, Ad = I2,
Ac = 0.05 I2, where I2 =

1 0
0 1

.
The maneuverability defined in this article was evaluated
using the l2-norm of the instantaneous tracking error e , while
the contact stability was measured using the human effort, J, to
drive the robot
J =
 T0
0
|fT
h(t)v(t)| dt (25)
where T0 is the task duration and v is the velocity of the
interaction system. To evaluate the disturbance identification,
the learned two-dimension disturbance d̂ for nonrepetitive tasks
ˆ
d = ˆ
dx
ˆ
dy
T
= K̂ x + K̂v ẋ + k̂p (26)
can be analyzed, where K̂, K̂v, k̂p are coefficients of the
disturbance learned according to (12).
Fig. 4(a) shows the trajectories of a representative subject
in one trial. In Fig. 4(a), the dashed black line, corresponding
to the subject guiding the robot without control and without
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
XING et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING FOR HUMAN-GUIDED ROBOTS IN CONTACT WITH UNKNOWN ENVIRONMENTS 3711
Fig. 4. Results of a representative subject for the nonrepetitive task with the H-MAN robot, in the conditions of control off (in red), velocity-based adaptation
(blue) and with the proposed adaptive impedance learning method (green). (a) Actual trajectories over one trial in each condition. (b) Average learned and actual
disturbance. (c) Average tracking error magnitude with ± standard deviation (std) error bars. (d) Average effort of the user with ± std error bars.
disturbance, serves as a reference for best possible guidance.
This reference trajectory slightly deviates from the 10 cm radius
circle, due to the H-MAN sensing error from cable deformation
and to the variability of exerted force. We see in Fig. 4(a) that
in the control off condition the disturbance largely affects the
tracking error performance so that an effective control strategy is
necessary to mitigate this negative effect. Although the velocity-
based impedance adaptation improves the tracking performance,
there is still tracking error with this method which does not
model the environment interaction. Fig. 4(c) and (d) suggests
that the proposed impedance learning controller yields a better
tracking performance while decreasing the effort to drive the
robot for tracking the moving target. This arises as this controller
accurately identifies the virtual environment. Fig. 4(b) indeed
shows that the disturbance d is well identified.
B. Repetitive Task
In the repetitive task, one trial consists of guiding
the robot during four iterations to track a target mov-
ing on a smaller circle. The target trajectory is defined
as [5 cos(0.25π t) 5 sin(0.25π t)]T
cm in the presence of
disturbance d = [dx dy]T
N where dx = 28(sin 160x)2
x +
4(sin 80x)2
ẋ and dy = 28(cos 240y)2
y + 4(cos 40y)2
ẏ.
In our experiment, when the human subject stopped at a
position for the prescribed time, we consider that the human
completed the task. Since Ti in our proposed method in (21) is
the time required by the human movement in the ith iteration to
complete the movement, it is computed as the time recorded by
the timer of the robot achieving speed below the specified thresh-
old minus this prescribed time. The abovementioned method of
obtaining Ti is also adaptable for the experiment with Panda
robot in Section VI-B.
The iterative impedance learning in (20), (21) was imple-
mented with the parameters Ke = 0.1 I2, A = I2, Av =
Ap = 0.05 I2, η = 1, μ = 0.01, T = 24 s. The iterative learn-
ing scheme was compared with the conditions of control off and
velocity-based impedance adaptation in (24) with parameters
a1 = a2 = 500, b1 = b2 = 2, c1 = c2 = 100. The maneuver-
ability and the contact stability were evaluated from the last
iteration of the five trials, where the effort metric J in (25) is
restricted to the last iteration’s period
J =
 Tm
0
|fT
h,m(t) v(t)| dt (27)
where Tm is the last iteration’s duration and m equals 4 for
this experiment. Similarly, the learned disturbance in (26) is
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
3712 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 39, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2023
Fig. 5. Results for a repetitive task carried out by a representative subject (same subject as Fig. 4) with the H-MAN robot, in the three conditions of control off
(red), with the velocity-based adaptation (blue) and with the proposed iterative impedance learning method in the last (4th) iteration (green). (a) Actual trajectories
over one trial. (b) Average learned and actual disturbances. (c) Average tracking error magnitude with ± std error bars. (d) Average effort of the user with ± error
std bars.
redefined as
ˆ
d = ˆ
dx
ˆ
dy
T
= K̂m xm + K̂v,m ẋm + k̂p,m (28)
where K̂m, K̂v,m, k̂p,m are computed from (21).
Fig. 5(a) shows the trajectory in the three control conditions
over one trial of each subject. Here also the disturbance has a
significant effect on tracking performance relative to the refer-
ence trajectory (without disturbance and without control), which
is partly addressed by the velocity-based adaptation. In com-
parison, the proposed impedance learning method reduces the
tracking error [see Fig. 5(c)] to a minimum, and also minimizes
the effort to drive the robot [see Fig. 5(d)]. The average learned
and the actual disturbance of four iterations are illustrated in Fig.
5(b). We see that the disturbance learned by iterative impedance
learning laws in (21) converges to the actual values. In compar-
ison with the nonrepetitive tracking task above, the controller
can now identify a more complex disturbance which contributes
to the good performance of our proposed method.
C. Performance With Disturbance at Different Levels
An additional experiment with the H-MAN was carried out
by the same subject as before in order to explore how our
proposed impedance learning method deals with different levels
of disturbance in both nonrepetitive and repetitive tasks.
Performance and effort were investigated at increasing lev-
els L = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 of disturbance. For the nonrepetitive task
the disturbance was (with x1, x2 in m and ẋ1, ẋ2 in m/s)
d = [dx dy]T
N where dx = 8(1 + 5 L)x1 + 0.4(1 + 2 L)ẋ1
and dy = 8(1 + 5 L)x2 + 0.4(1 + 2 L)ẋ2. The disturbance for
the repetitive task was with dx = 20(1 + 3 L)(sin 10x1)2
x1 +
8(1 + L)(sin 10x1)2
ẋ1 and dy = 20(1 + 3 L)(cos 10x2)2
x2 +
8(1 + 1 L)(cos 10x2)2
ẋ2. Five trials were carried out with each
control condition, which were presented in the same pseudoran-
dom order as before.
Tracking performance representing the contact stability was
analyzed using the total error
E ≡
 T
0
e(t) dt (29)
where T is the nonrepetitive task duration or the duration of the
last iteration for the repetitive task.
To evaluate the improvement of contact stability and maneu-
verability, we calculate the decrease of total error and effort with
velocity-based adaptation and impedance learning relative to the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
XING et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING FOR HUMAN-GUIDED ROBOTS IN CONTACT WITH UNKNOWN ENVIRONMENTS 3713
Fig. 6. Relative reduction of total tracking error and effort with disturbances of increasing magnitude (defined in the text) (a) in the nonrepetitive task and (b) in
the repetitive task.
Fig. 7. Results of experiment carried out by six human subjects with the H-MAN robot and different control conditions, to validate the proposed impedance
learning on a virtual disturbance. Average and ± std of total tracking error and effort are over the five trials (a) in the nonrepetitive task and (b) in the repetitive
task where only the last iteration (of the five trials) is considered.
control off condition, respectively, using
PE =

EN −Eex
EN
× 100 for velocity-based adaptation
EN −Ede
EN
× 100 for impedance learning
(30)
PF =

JN −Jex
JN
× 100 for velocity-based adaptation
JN −Jde
JN
× 100 for impedance learning
(31)
where EN , Eex, and Ede are values of E defined in (29) in
the conditions of control off, with the velocity-based adaptation
and with the proposed impedance learning method, respectively;
similarly, JN , Jex, and Jde are, respectively, the values of J
[defined in (25) for nonrepetitive tasks and (27) for repeti-
tive tasks]. According to (30), (31), PE and PF indicate the
improvement of trajectory tracking accuracy and effort-saving
using velocity-based and proposed controls, respectively. The
higher value the index is, the greater improvement brought by the
controller. The parameters of the velocity-based and proposed
controllers were maintained as in Sections V-A–B.
Fig. 6 shows the average percentage index PE and PF of
five trials in different tasks. As we see in Fig. 6(a) and (b),
impedance learning does not offer an obvious advantage over
the velocity-based method to reduce the tracking error for an
environmental disturbance of small amplitude. However, in both
the nonrepetitive and repetitive tasks, the tracking performance
benefits increase with the disturbance level, exhibiting less
tracking error at higher levels. Due to the limited capability of
controllers in improving trajectory tracking performance and the
limitation of the robot platform, no further improvement over
L = 3 is observed in Fig. 6(b).
Fig. 6 shows that the effort reduction with both the velocity-
based and impedance learning control increases with the distur-
bance level in the nonrepetitive and repetitive tasks. However the
benefits of the impedance learning approach are larger compared
to the velocity-based approach.
D. Overall Results of Multiple Subjects With H-MAN Robot
We can see in Fig. 7 that the proposed control with impedance
learningoutperformsthevelocity-basedcontrolinimprovingthe
tracking performance and minimizing effort for both nonrepet-
itive and repetitive tasks, which demonstrates its advantages
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
3714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 39, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2023
Fig. 8. Experimental setups for 3-D tasks in contact with the environment. (a) Franka Emika Panda robot with 7-DoFs used in the experiments. (b) Mechanism
with handle to separate measurement of the user applied interaction force from the interaction with the environment. (c) Nonrepetitive carving task. (d) Repetitive
grinding task and the CAD schematic drawing of the 3-D surface.
in ensuring the contact stability and maneuverability of the
interaction system.
VI. APPLICATION TO 3-D TASKS WITH UNKNOWN
ENVIRONMENT
A second experiment was carried out to test the efficiency
of impedance learning control in 3-D tasks involving unknown
environment’s interactions, as well as its robustness to the
variability of duration when humans repeat a movement. As
shown in Fig. 8(a), subjects guided a 7-DoF Franka Emika
Panda robot along a reference shape previously traced by the
robot while interacting with a cordless rotary carving tool and
a grinding tool as shown in Fig. 8(c) and (d), respectively.
Compared with the software designed disturbance in Section V,
the disturbance in this section arises from the contact with the
environment due to the hard texture of the environment and
the vibration caused by the high-frequency rotation of the tool.
This experiment tests whether the interaction model of (6) is
valid in this case and if the controller yields stable and efficient
movement assistance to the human operator.
To decouple the human force from the environmental inter-
action, a mechanism was fixed between the robot extremity and
the tool, as shown in Fig. 8(b). This mechanism was designed
to measure the force exerted by the operator and separate it
from tool interaction with the environment. The Franka control
interface provides the current status of the robot and an external
workstation PC was connected with the Panda robot via Eth-
ernet to realize real-time control at 1 kHz. Joint position and
velocity as well as the force exerted on the robot were recorded
at 1 kHz.
The experiment protocol was approved by the UWE Research
Ethics Committee (UWE REC REF No: FET-2122-59). A total
of 12 human subjects without known sensorimotor impairment
were recruited to carry out one of the two tasks with the Panda
robot (with six subjects for each of them), who gave their in-
formed consent prior to participation. Each subject was allowed
to practice until becoming familiar with the robot guidance and
the carving or grinding task. They then carried out five trials in
each of the conditions control off, velocity-based control in (24)
and impedance learning as described in Section V, and were
naive to the conditions tested.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
XING et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING FOR HUMAN-GUIDED ROBOTS IN CONTACT WITH UNKNOWN ENVIRONMENTS 3715
Fig. 9. Results of a representative subject in the nonrepetitive carving task with the Panda robot, in control off (grey), with velocity-based control (green), and
with the proposed adaptive impedance learning method (blue). (a) “8” carved by the human user. (b) Average norm of path error with ± std error bars. (c) Average
effort of the human user with ± std error bars.
Sections VI-A–B show detailed results of a representative,
while the overall results of the six subjects are provided in
Section VI-C.
A. Nonrepetitive Carving Task
In the nonrepetitive carving task, an “8” shape in red color was
first traced by the robot on a hard wooden board with a cordless
rotary carving tool, as shown in Fig. 8(c). Then, each subject
guided the robot along this shape once for a trial in the three con-
trol conditions. Velocity-based adaption was implemented with
a1 = a2 = 200, b1 = b2 = 10, c1 = c2 = 20, and impedance
learning with Ke = 150I2, Af = Ad = Ac = 1000 I2.
The time to carry out the tasks between different trials varies.
To be able to compare different trials of a subject and between
subjects, the errors in all trials of all subjects were normalized
to the average duration of a representative subject.
Fig. 9(a) shows the character carved by a representative sub-
ject in the first trial of the three control conditions. The average
norm of the path error e and the average effort J of the human
user defined in (25) of five trials is shown in Fig. 9(b) and (c),
respectively. Both the path error and driving effort in the last
trial are lowered slightly using the velocity-based control, and
reduced more using impedance learning.
B. Repetitive Grinding Task
In the repetitive grinding task, a cordless rotary tool was
mountedonthedesignedmechanismtogrindarough3D-printed
surface, as shown in Fig. 8(d). An arc was first traced by the
robot on the 3-D surface as the reference for the subjects before
recording. Then, each subject held the force sensor and carried
out trials to grind the 3-D surface along the reference. Five trials
were completed in each condition, where one trial consists of
four iterations [m = 4 for (27), (28)], i.e., four times back and
forth. The parameters were set as a1 = a2 = 200, b1 = b2 = 5,
c1 = c1 = 10 for the velocity-based adaptation and
Ke = 200I2, A = Av = 100 I2, Ap = 350 I2, η = 0.001,
μ = 0.005, T = 8 s, a1 = a2 = 200, b1 = b2 = 5, c1 = c1 =
10 for impedance learning.
TheresultsofarepresentativesubjectareshowninFig.10.We
see in the photos of grinding performance of Fig. 10(a) that all
iterations of the first trial deviate from the reference with control
off and velocity-based adaptation, without any apparent learning
taking place. This bias is caused by the non-negligible robot
mechanical impedance experienced when guiding the robot
along the 3-D surface. To analyze how the tracking performance
changes with iterations, the 3-D recorded data is reproduced in
Fig. 10(b), which shows the path from the average of back and
forth movements in all iterations. We see that the velocity-based
method yields a slight improvement, but performance does not
improve over the iterations. With iterative impedance learning,
the first iteration similarly deviates from the desired path, but
the movement approaches it more with each iteration.
Fig. 10(c) shows the resulting error and standard deviation er-
ror bars as a function of normalized time, in the last iteration over
the five trials. The average driving effort in (27) is shown in Fig.
10(d). Overall, Fig. 10 exhibits that the velocity-based approach
enables limited performance improvement, while impedance
learning results in a clear decrease in both path error and the
driving effort.
C. Experiment Results of Multiple Subjects for Carving and
Grinding Tasks
Fig. 11(a) and (b) shows average values of total path error
E defined in (29) and average effort J, respectively, over the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
3716 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 39, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2023
Fig. 10. Results of a representative subject (same subject as Fig. 9) in the repetitive grinding task with the Panda robot. (a) Three C-shaped trajectories grinded
by the human user. (b) Actual trajectories of the human user in the 3-D space in four iterations. (c) Norm of path errors with ± std error bars. (d) Average effort of
the human user with ± std error bars.
Fig. 11. Total error and effort of six subjects in the carving and grinding tasks carried out on the Panda robot with control off, velocity-based adaptation and
impedance learning. Each column shows the average and ± std error bars.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
XING et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING FOR HUMAN-GUIDED ROBOTS IN CONTACT WITH UNKNOWN ENVIRONMENTS 3717
six subjects that carried out each experiment. We see in Fig.
11 that the velocity-based adaptation algorithm reduces the
tracking error and effort relative to control off in two tasks with
a limitation as the disturbance cannot be fully compensated for.
By comparison, the proposed impedance method reduces them
more, exhibiting less error and effort than with velocity-based
control. These results suggest that impedance learning can han-
dle temporal variability in human movements, and ensure both
contact stability and maneuverability in the presence of a real
environment.
VII. DISCUSSION
For a human-guided robot, environmental disturbances can
result in contact instabilities, requiring the human to increase
their control effort at the expense of loss of maneuverability. In
this article, to concurrently ensure contact stability and maneu-
verability, a novel impedance control scheme was developed.
This was first done for nonrepetitive tasks, where the robot
updates its impedance to adapt to the disturbance with con-
stant coefficients. An iterative impedance control strategy was
then designed to handle disturbances with varying space-related
coefficients. With the proposed control, the human effort can
be reduced with stable interaction and the robot can follow the
desired trajectory in the presence of environmental disturbances.
The larger the disturbance, the more obvious the advantage of the
proposed strategy. The effectiveness of the proposed impedance
control scheme for both nonrepetitive and repetitive tasks was
validated in experiments to identify a known virtual interaction
and to test performance in interaction with real environments.
The experiments also showed that our impedance learn-
ing controller outperforms the commonly used velocity-based
impedance adaption of [4]. Similar to our method, the velocity-
based adaptation method considers both interactions with the
human operator and the environment. It infers the human’s
active intention according to human’s velocity, while the robot
controller cancels the effect of the environmental disturbance.
However, this method does not involve any learning techniques,
and the selection of its parameters requires prior knowledge
about the task. Namely, the degree of the relationship between
the control input and the velocity of the system should be
properly reflected when setting the parameters A = diag{aj},
B = diag{bj}, C = diag{cj}. For instance, parameters A
and C should be selected according to the possible range of
velocities of the task so that a variation of the damping within
[C , A ] can be obtained.
In contrast, the impedance learning controller introduced in
this article uses an explicit model of the environment interaction.
As a consequence, it does not require prior knowledge of the
environment to guarantee the stability of the system, as was
proved in the appendices and verified in the experiments carried
out in real environments.
The proposed controller may be extended to teleoperation,
where impedance learning can ensure the contact stability be-
tween the remote robot and its environment, while no additional
control effort is required from the human operator. The learning
capability of the proposed controller may play a more significant
role where time delay exists in the teleoperation system. In this
case, even if the human operator makes more control effort,
they may still fail to handle the contact between the robot and
the environment. One of our future works will be investigation
of this hypothesis.
APPENDIX A
PROOF OF THEOREM 1
This Appendix describes the proof of Theorem 1 in Sec-
tion III. To attenuate the undesired effect of the unknown en-
vironment during trajectory tracking, both tracking error and
estimation errors are minimized. We, therefore, introduce the
Lyapunov function candidate
V = V1 + V2 + V3 + V4
V1 =
1
2
ėT
M ė , V2 =
1
2
n
j=1
1
Aj
f

k̃
j
T
k̃
j
V3 =
1
2
n
j=1
1
Aj
d

k̃
j
v
T
k̃
j
v , V4 =
1
2
n
j=1
1
Aj
c

k̃j
p
2
(32)
where V1 is a quadratic function of the robot tracking error, and
V2, V3, V4 denote the squared estimation errors of disturbance
coefficients; k̃
j
, k̃
j
v ∈ Rn
are, respectively, the jth column
vectors of Rn×n
matrices K̃ and K̃v, where j = 1, 2, . . . , n;
k̃j
p ∈ R is the jth element of Rn
vector k̃p in (18); positive
constants Aj
f , Aj
d, Aj
c ∈ R are the jth diagonal elements of
Rn×n
matrices Af , Ad, Ac, respectively.
Using (17) and the skew-symmetry property, i.e., ζT
(1
2 Ṁ −
B)ζ = 0 for ∀ζ ∈ Rn
, the derivative of V1 is
V̇1 = ėT

−Ke ė + K̃x + K̃v ẋ + k̃p

. (33)
Taking the derivatives of V2, V3, V4 and using (12) yields
V̇2 = −
n
j=1
1
Aj
f

k̃
j
T
˙
k̂j
= −
n
j=1

k̃
j
T
ė xj (34)
V̇3 = −
n
j=1
1
Aj
d

k̃
j
v
T
˙
k̂j
v = −
n
j=1

k̃
j
v
T
ė ẋj (35)
V̇4 = −
n
j=1
1
Aj
c
k̃j
p
˙
k̂j
p = −
n
j=1
k̃j
p ėj (36)
wherek̂
j
, k̂
j
v ∈ Rn
arethejthcolumnvectorsofRn×n
matrices
K̂ and K̂v, and k̂j
p, xj, ej ∈ R are the jth elements of Rn
vectors k̂p, x, and e.
Then, V̇ can be computed by summing up (33)–(36) as
V̇ = V̇1 + V̇2 + V̇3 + V̇4
= ėT

−Ke ė + K̃x + K̃vẋ + k̃p

−
n
j=1
k̃j
p ėj
−
n
j=1

k̃
j
T
ėxj −
n
j=1

k̃
j
v
T
ėẋj
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
3718 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 39, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2023
= − ėT
Ke ė ≤ 0 (37)
where the term ėT
K̃x is canceled by −
n
j=1 (k̃
j
)
T
ėxj,
ėT
K̃vẋ by −
n
j=1 (k̃
j
v)
T
ėẋj, and ėT
k̃p by −
n
j=1 k̃j
pėj.
Applying [29, Lemma A.6], it then follows
lim
t→∞
ė = lim
t→∞
ë = 0 (38)
and with (17)
lim
t→∞

K̃x + K̃v ẋ + k̃p

= 0 (39)
so that the environmental disturbance can be estimated and the
human can easily guide the robot even with the disturbance of
an unknown environment. 
APPENDIX B
PROOF OF THEOREM 2
In the space domain, the robot controller in (20) can be
rewritten as follows:
ui = −K̂s,i xi − K̂vs,i ẋi − k̂ps,i − Keėi + g (40)
where space-related impedance matrices K̂s,i ∈ Rn×n
and
K̂vs,i ∈ Rn×n
and vector k̂ps,i ∈ Rn
should be updated with
the position change of the robot.
The undesired effect of the unknown environment is expected
to be canceled by the robot during trajectory tracking, which is
both to minimize the tracking error and improve the environment
identification. Consequently, a Lyapunov function candidate is
designed as follows to prove the stability of the controlled
human-guided robot in Section IV
Vi = Ve,i + Vk,i + Vv,i + Vp,i
Ve,i =
1
2
ε̇T
i M ε̇i , Vk,i =
1
2

Ω
Ψks,i (ξ) dξ
Vv,i =
1
2

Ω
Ψvs,i (ξ) dξ , Vp,i =
1
2

Ω
Ψps,i (ξ) dξ
εi =

ei , if t ∈ [0, Ti]
ei (Ti) , if t ∈

Ti , T
ξ = ξ1
· · · ξn
, dξ = dξ1
· · · dξn
Ψks,i (ξ) = 1
α1

k̃
1
s,i (ξ)
T
sgn

v1

k̃
1
s,i (ξ) · · ·
1
αn

k̃
n
s,i (ξ)
T
sgn (vn
) k̃
n
s,i (ξ)

Ψvs,i (ξ) = 1
α1
v

k̃
1
vs,i (ξ)
T
sgn

v1

k̃
1
vs,i (ξ) · · ·
1
αn
v

k̃
n
vs,i (ξ)
T
sgn (vn
) k̃
n
vs,i (ξ)

Ψps,i (ξ) = 1
α1
p
sgn

v1
 
k̃1
ps,i (ξ)
2
· · ·
1
αn
p
sgn (vn
)

k̃n
ps,i (ξ)
2

(41)
where Ve,i denotes the robot tracking error; Vk,i, Vv,i, and Vp,i
are estimation errors of the coefficients of the disturbance rep-
resented by the introduced Ψ functions; Ω = {x, 0 ≤ t ≤ T};
k̃
j
s,i ∈ Rn
and k̃
j
vs,i ∈ Rn
are the jth column vectors of Rn×n
matrices K̃s,i = Ks − K̂s,i and K̃vs,i = Kvs − K̂vs,i, re-
spectively; k̃j
ps,i ∈ R is the jth element of Rn
vector k̃ps,i =
kps − k̂ps,i; sgn(·) is the sign function; positive constants
αj
, αj
v, αj
p ∈ R are the jth diagonal elements of Rn×n
matrices
A, Av, Ap, respectively. Since the stability of the iterative
learning control is verified from the perspective of iterations
instead of time, Vk,i, Vv,i, and Vp,i are, respectively, designed
to be in an integral form of functions Ψks,i, Ψvs,i, and Ψps,i
in one iteration.
Since
Vk,i =
1
2
n
j=1
 sj
0
1
αj

k̃
j
s,i
T
sgn

vj

k̃
j
s,i dξj
=
1
2
n
j=1
 t
0
1
αj

k̃
j
s,i
T
sgn

vj

k̃
j
s,i
˙
ξj
dσ
=
1
2
n
j=1
 t
0
1
αj

k̃
j
s,i
T 
vj

 k̃
j
s,i dσ > 0 (42)
and similarly
Vv,i =
1
2
n
j=1
 t
0
1
αj
v

k̃
j
vs,i
T 
vj

 k̃
j
vs,i dσ > 0 (43)
Vp,i =
1
2
n
j=1
 t
0
1
αj
p

vj



k̃j
ps,i
2
dσ > 0 (44)
where σ is an integration variable of time, the system Lyapunov
function in (41) is positive and satisfies Vi > 0.
The following cases are considered for stability analysis.
Case 1: t ∈ [0, Ti]. In such a case, εi = ei holds and taking
the derivative of Ve,i yields
V̇e,i = ėT
i Mëi +
1
2
ėT
i Ṁėi. (45)
Based on the skew-symmetry property [25], substituting (22)
into (45) yields
V̇e,i = ėT
i

−Ke ėi + K̃i xi + K̃v,i ẋi + k̃p,i

. (46)
The integral of (46) can be calculated as
Ve,i =
 t
0
V̇e,i dσ + Ve,i(0)
=
 t
0
ėT
i

−Ke ėi + K̃i xi + K̃v,i ẋi + k̃p,i

dσ .
(47)
Define
ΔVe,i = Ve,i − Ve,i−1 (48)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
XING et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING FOR HUMAN-GUIDED ROBOTS IN CONTACT WITH UNKNOWN ENVIRONMENTS 3719
and then we have
ΔVe,i ≤
 t
0
ėT
i

−Keėi + K̃i xi + K̃v,i ẋi + k̃p,i

dσ .
(49)
Similarly, we define
ΔVk,i = Vk,i − Vk,i−1 (50)
ΔVv,i = Vv,i − Vv,i−1 (51)
ΔVp,i = Vp,i − Vp,i−1. (52)
Then, according to (42), we get
ΔVk,i =
1
2
n
j=1
1
αj
 sj
0

k̃
j
s,i
T
sgn

vj

k̃
j
s,i
−

k̃
j
s,i
T
sgn

vj

k̃
j
s,i−1 +

k̃
j
s,i
T
sgn

vj

k̃
j
s,i−1
−

k̃
j
s,i−1
T
sgn

vj

k̃
j
s,i−1

dξj
. (53)
Define
ΔK̂s,i (ξ) = K̂s,i (ξ) − K̂s,i−1 (ξ) (54)
ΔK̂vs,i (ξ) = K̂vs,i (ξ) − K̂vs,i−1 (ξ) (55)
Δk̂ps,i (ξ) = k̂ps,i (ξ) − k̂ps,i−1 (ξ) (56)
and thus, we have
K̃s,i (ξ) − K̃s,i−1 (ξ) = −ΔK̂s,i (ξ) (57)
K̃vs,i (ξ) − K̃vs,i−1 (ξ) = −ΔK̂vs,i (ξ) (58)
k̃ps,i (ξ) − k̃ps,i−1 (ξ) = −Δk̂ps,i (ξ). (59)
Using (57), (53) can be rewritten as
ΔVk,i = −
1
2
n
j=1
1
αj
 sj
0

k̃
j
s,i
T
sgn

vj

Δk̂
j
s,i
+

k̃
j
s,i−1
T
sgn

vj

Δk̂
j
s,i

dξj
= −
n
j=1
1
αj
 sj
0

k̃
j
s,i +
1
2
Δk̂
j
s,i
T
× sgn

vj

Δk̂
j
s,i dξj
(60)
and thus, one gets
ΔVk,i ≤ −
n
j=1
1
αj
 t
0

k̃
j
i
T 
vj

 Δk̂
j
i dσ . (61)
Similarly, using (43), (58) and (44), (59) yields
ΔVv,i ≤ −
n
j=1
1
αj
v
 t
0

k̃
j
v,i
T 
vj

 Δk̂
j
v,i dσ (62)
ΔVp,i ≤ −
n
j=1
1
αj
p
 t
0
k̃j
p,i

vj

 Δk̂j
p,i dσ . (63)
Summing up inequalities (49), (61), (62), (63) yields
ΔVi ≤
 t
0
ėT
i

−Ke ėi + K̃i xi + K̃v,i ẋi + k̃p,i

dσ
−
n
j=1
1
αj
 t
0

k̃
j
i
T 
vj

 Δk̂
j
i dσ
−
n
j=1
1
αj
v
 t
0

k̃
j
v,i
T 
vj

 Δk̂
j
v,i dσ
−
n
j=1
1
αj
p
 t
0
k̃j
p,i

vj

 Δk̂j
p,i dσ. (64)
Substituting (21) into inequality (64), we have
ΔVi ≤
 t
0
ėT
i

−Ke ėi + K̃i xi + K̃v,i ẋi + k̃p,i

dσ
−
n
j=1
 t
0
k̃j
p,iėj
i dσ −
n
j=1
 t
0

k̃
j
i
T
ėi xj
i dσ
−
n
j=1
 t
0

k̃
j
v,i
T
ėi ẋj
i dσ
= −
 t
0
ėT
i Ke ėi dσ ≤ 0 (65)
where ej
i ∈ R and xj
i ∈ R are the jth elements of ei ∈ Rn
and
xi ∈ Rn
, respectively.
Case 2: t ∈ (Ti, T ]. According to the definition of εi and
(47), (48), one gets
ΔVe,i ≤ Ve,i(t)
=
 Ti
0
ėT
i

−Ke ėi + K̃i xi + K̃v,i ẋi + k̃p,i

dσ.
(66)
Observing (21), it is known that K̂i, K̂v,i, and k̂p,i stop
updating during t ∈ (Ti, T ] so that ΔK̂i = ΔK̂v,i = Δk̂p,i =
0. Then, according to (61)–(63), the following inequality holds:
ΔVk,i + ΔVv,i + ΔVp,i
≤ −
n
j=1
1
αj
 Ti
0

k̃
j
i
T 
vj

 Δk̂
j
i dσ
−
n
j=1
1
αj
v
 Ti
0

k̃
j
v,i
T 
vj

 Δk̂
j
v,i dσ
−
n
j=1
1
αj
p
 Ti
0
k̃j
p,i

vj

 Δk̂j
p,i dσ. (67)
Combing inequalities (66), (67), we have
ΔVi = ΔVe,i + ΔVk,i + ΔVv,i + ΔVp,i
≤
 Ti
0
ėT
i

−Ke ėi + K̃i xi + K̃v,i ẋi + k̃p,i

dσ
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
3720 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 39, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2023
−
n
j=1
1
αj
 Ti
0

k̃
j
i
T 
vj

 Δk̂
j
i dσ
−
n
j=1
1
αj
v
 Ti
0

k̃
j
v,i
T 
vj

 Δk̂
j
v,i dσ
−
n
j=1
1
αj
p
 Ti
0
k̃j
p,i

vj

 Δk̂j
p,i dσ. (68)
As a result, similar to inequalities (64), (65) in case 1 with
t = Ti, we obtain
ΔVi ≤ −
 Ti
0
ėT
i Ke ėi dσ ≤ 0. (69)
Combining inequalities (65), (69), we see that ΔVi ≤ 0 holds
in both cases 1 and 2. Consequently, as the initial energy of
the human–robot system is bounded, Vi is monotonically de-
creasing with iterations when ΔVi < 0. Since Vi is defined to
be positive, according to the definition of Vi in (41), it indicates
that
lim
i→∞
K̃s,i = lim
t→∞
K̃vs,i = lim
t→∞
k̃ps,i = 0 . (70)
When ΔVi = 0, it gives rise to
ėi = ëi = 0 (71)
thus
K̃i xi + K̃v,i ẋi + k̃p,i = 0 (72)
according to (22). As a result, the disturbance can be estimated
by the proposed impedance learning method and the robot can
follow the desired trajectory of the human in the presence of
disturbances. Theorem 2 is thus verified.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank A. Sena and H. Godaba for
their careful reading and comments on the manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Ajoudani, N. Tsagarakis, and A. Bicchi, “Tele-impedance: Teleopera-
tion with impedance regulation using a body–machine interface,” Int. J.
Robot. Res., vol. 31, no. 13, pp. 1642–1656, 2012.
[2] L. Peternel, N. Tsagarakis, and A. Ajoudani, “A human–robot co-
manipulation approach based on human sensorimotor information,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 811–822, Jul. 2017.
[3] R. Ikeura and H. Inooka, “Variable impedance control of a robot for
cooperation with a human,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 1995,
vol. 3, pp. 3097–3102.
[4] R. Ikeura, T. Moriguchi, and K. Mizutani, “Optimal variable impedance
control for a robot and its application to lifting an object with a human,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Hum. Interactive Commun., 2002,
pp. 500–505.
[5] Y. Li and S. S. Ge, “Human–robot collaboration based on motion in-
tention estimation,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 19, no. 3,
pp. 1007–1014, Jun. 2014.
[6] T. Tsumugiwa, R. Yokogawa, and K. Hara, “Variable impedance control
based on estimation of human arm stiffness for human-robot cooperative
calligraphic task,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2002, vol. 1,
pp. 644–650.
[7] C. Mitsantisuk, K. Ohishi, and S. Katsura, “Variable mechanical stiffness
control based on human stiffness estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Mechatronics, 2011, pp. 731–736.
[8] V. Duchaine and C. M. Gosselin, “General model of human-robot co-
operation using a novel velocity based variable impedance control,” in
Proc. Joint EuroHaptics Conf. Symp. Haptic Interfaces Virtual Environ.
Teleoperator Syst., 2007, pp. 446–451.
[9] J. R. Medina, H. Börner, S. Endo, and S. Hirche, “Impedance-based
Gaussian processes for modeling human motor behavior in physical and
non-physical interaction,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 66, no. 9,
pp. 2499–2511, Sep. 2019.
[10] K. Li, H. Zhao, T. Nuchkrua, Y. Yuan, and H. Ding, “Sparse bayesian
learning-based adaptive impedance control in physical human-robot
interaction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Biomimetics, 2018,
pp. 2379–2385.
[11] X. Xing, K. Maqsood, D. Huang, C. Yang, and Y. Li, “Iterative
learning-based robotic controller with prescribed human-robot interaction
force,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 3395–3408,
Oct. 2022.
[12] Y. Li et al., “A review on interaction control for contact robots through
intent detection,” Prog. Biomed. Eng., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 1–21, 2022.
[13] W. He, S. S. Ge, Y. Li, E. Chew, and Y. S. Ng, “Neural network control of
a rehabilitation robot by state and output feedback,” J. Intell. Robot. Syst.,
vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 15–31, 2015.
[14] W. He, C. Xue, X. Yu, Z. Li, and C. Yang, “Admittance-based con-
troller design for physical human-robot interaction in the constrained task
space,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1937–1949,
Oct. 2020.
[15] Y. Li, X. Zhou, J. Zhong, and X. Li, “Robotic impedance learning for
robot-assisted physical training,” Front. Robot. AI, vol. 6, 2019, Art. no. 78.
[16] Y. Li, G. Ganesh, N. Jarrassé, S. Haddadin, A. Albu-Schaeffer, and E.
Burdet, “Force, impedance, and trajectory learning for contact tooling and
haptic identification,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1170–1182,
Oct. 2018.
[17] A. Fayazi, N. Pariz, A. Karimpour, and S. H. Hosseinnia, “Robust position-
based impedance control of lightweight single-link flexible robots inter-
acting with the unknown environment via a fractional-order sliding mode
controller,” Robotica, vol. 36, pp. 1920–1942, 2018.
[18] F. Stulp, J. Büchli, A. Ellmer, M. Mistry, E. A. Theodorou, and S. Schaal,
“Model-free reinforcement learning of impedance control in stochas-
tic environments,” IEEE Trans. Auton. Ment. Develop., vol. 4, no. 4,
pp. 330–341, Dec. 2012.
[19] J. Luo et al., “Reinforcement learning on variable impedance controller
for high-precision robotic assembly,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
2019, pp. 3080–3087.
[20] R. Martan-Martan, M. A. Lee, R. Gardner, S. Savarese, J. Bohg, and A.
Garg, “Variable impedance control in end-effector space: An action space
for reinforcement learning in contact-rich tasks,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2019, pp. 1010–1017.
[21] M.Bogdanovic,M.Khadiv,andL.Righetti,“Learningvariableimpedance
control for contact sensitive tasks,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 5, no. 4,
pp. 6129–6136, Oct. 2020.
[22] H. Huang and C. Yang, and C. L. P. Chen, “Optimal robot–environment in-
teraction under broad fuzzy neural adaptive control,” IEEE Trans. Cybern.,
vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 3824–3835, Jul. 2021.
[23] E. Burdet, D. W. Franklin, and T. E. Milner, Human Robotics: Neurome-
chanics and Motor Control. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2013.
[24] M. Bin Suleiman, Z. B. Binti Ibrahim, and A. F. N. Bin Rasedee, “Solution
of higher-order odes using backward difference method,” Math. Problems
Eng., vol. 2011, pp. 1–18, 2011.
[25] J.-J. E. Slotine and W. Li, Applied Nonlinear Control. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1991.
[26] C.-L. Chen and Y.-H. Yang, “Position-dependent disturbance rejec-
tion using spatial-based adaptive feedback linearization repetitive con-
trol,” Int. J. Robust Nonlinear Control, vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 1337–1363,
2009.
[27] E. Burdet, R. Osu, D. W. Franklin, T. Yoshioka, T. E. Milner, and M.
Kawato, “A method for measuring endpoint stiffness during multi-joint
arm movements,” J. Biomech., vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 1705–1709, 2000.
[28] D. Shen and J. Xu, “Adaptive learning control for nonlinear systems with
randomly varying iteration lengths,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1119–1132, Apr. 2019.
[29] M. S. D. Queiroz, D. M. Dawson, S. P. Nagarkatti, and F. Zhang, Lyapunov-
Based Control of Mechanical Systems. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2012.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
XING et al.: IMPEDANCE LEARNING FOR HUMAN-GUIDED ROBOTS IN CONTACT WITH UNKNOWN ENVIRONMENTS 3721
Xueyan Xing received the B.S. degree in automation
from Northeastern University, Shenyang, China, in
2015, the M.S. degree in control engineering from
the Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, in
2017, and the Ph.D. degree in control theory and con-
trol engineering from Beihang University, Beijing,
China, in 2020.
She was a Research Fellow with the Department
of Engineering and Design, University of Sussex,
Brighton, U.K., from 2020 to 2022. She is currently
a Research Fellow with the Continental-NTU Corpo-
rate Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Her current research
interests include physical human–robot interaction, distributed control and op-
timization, and vibration control.
Etienne Burdet (Member, IEEE) received the M.S.
degree in mathematics, the M.S. degree in physics,
and the Ph.D. degree in robotics from ETH-Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland, in 1990, 1991, and 1996, respec-
tively.
He is currently a Professor and a Chair of Human
Robotics with Imperial College London. He uses an
integrative approach of neuroscience and robotics
to investigate human sensorimotor control, and to
design efficient assistive devices and training systems
for neuro-rehabilitation, which are tested in clinical
trials and commercialized. His main research interest is in human–machine
interaction.
Weiyong Si received the M.S. degree in aerospace
engineering from the Beijing Institute of Technology,
Beijing, China, in 2018. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in robotics with Bristol
Robotics Laboratory, University of the West of Eng-
land, Bristol, U.K.
His research interests include robot skill learning,
teleoperation, and robot control.
Chenguang Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in control engineering from the
National University of Singapore, Singapore, in 2010.
He received a postdoctoral training in human
robotics from the Imperial College London, London,
U.K. His research interest lies in human–robot inter-
action and intelligent system design.
Dr. Yang was the recipient of U.K. EPSRC UKRI
InnovationFellowshipandindividualEUMarieCurie
International Incoming Fellowship. As the lead au-
thor, he was also the recipient of the IEEE Transac-
tions on Robotics Best Paper Award (2012) and IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems Outstanding Paper Award (2022). He is the
Corresponding Co-Chair of IEEE Technical Committee on Collaborative Au-
tomation for Flexible Manufacturing, a Fellow of Institute of Engineering and
Technology (IET), a Fellow of Institution of Mechanical Engineers (IMechE),
and a Fellow of British Computer Society (BCS).
Yanan Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Eng. and M.Eng. degrees in automatic control from
the Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, in
2006 and 2008, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in
robotics from the National University of Singapore,
Singapore, in 2013.
From 2015 to 2017, he was a Research Associate
withtheDepartmentofBioengineering,ImperialCol-
lege London, London, U.K. From 2013 to 2015, he
was a Research Scientist with the Institute for In-
focomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology
and Research, Singapore. He is currently a Senior Lecturer in Control Engi-
neering with the Department of Engineering and Design, University of Sussex,
Brighton, U.K. His general research interests include human–robot interaction,
robot control, and control theory and applications.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 12:47:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
