=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 23, NO. 3, JUNE 2018 1193
A DMPs-Based Framework for Robot Learning
and Generalization of Humanlike Variable
Impedance Skills
Chenguang Yang , Senior Member, IEEE, Chao Zeng , Cheng Fang , Member, IEEE,
Wei He , Senior Member, IEEE, and Zhijun Li , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—One promising approach for robots efficiently
learning skills is to learn manipulation skills from human
tutors by demonstration and then generalize these learned
skills to complete new tasks. Traditional learning and
generalization methods, however, have not well considered
human impedance features, which makes the skills less
humanlike and restricted in physical human–robot interac-
tion scenarios. In particular, stiffness generalization has
not been well considered. This paper develops a framework
that enables the robot to learn both movement and stiffness
features from the human tutor. To this end, the upper limb
muscle activities of the human tutor are monitored to extract
variable stiffness in real time, and the estimated human
arm endpoint stiffness is properly mapped into the robot
impedance controller. Then, a dynamic movement primi-
tives model is extended and employed to simultaneously
encode the movement trajectories and the stiffness profiles.
In this way, both position trajectory and stiffness profile are
considered for robot motion control in this paper to realize
a more complete skill transfer process. More importantly,
stiffness generalization and movement generalization can
be efficiently realized by the proposed framework. Exper-
imental tests have been performed on a dual-arm Baxter
robot to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method.
Index Terms—Dynamic movement primitives (DMPs),
human–robot interaction, stiffness generalization, variable
impedance skill transfer.
Manuscript received October 22, 2017; revised January 28, 2018; ac-
cepted March 13, 2018. Date of publication March 20, 2018; date of
current version June 12, 2018. Recommended by Technical Editor H. A.
Varol. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grants 61473120, 61625303, 61751310, in
part by the Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangzhou un-
der Grant 201607010006, in part by the State Key Laboratory of Robotics
and System (HIT) under Grant SKLRS-2017-KF-13, and in part by the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant
2017ZD057. (Corresponding author: Chenguang Yang.)
C. Yang and C. Zeng are with the Key Laboratory of Autonomous
Systems and Networked Control, College of Automation Science and
Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640,
China (e-mail: cyang@ieee.org; mjzengchao@163.com).
C. Fang is with the Humanoids and Human Centered Mechatronics
Lab, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova 16163, Italy (e-mail: cheng.
fang@iit.it).
W. He is with the School of Automation and Electrical Engineering,
University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China
(e-mail: weihe@ieee.org).
Z. Li is with Department of Automation, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei, 230026, China (email: zjli@ieee.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMECH.2018.2817589
I. INTRODUCTION
IT IS increasingly expected that robots are capable of flexible
skills in order to adapt to more complex situations in phys-
ical human–robot interaction systems. Teaching by demonstra-
tion (TbD) [1], [2] is considered as one of the most effective
ways for robots to learn motion and manipulation skills from
humans. Conventional TbD methods, e.g., joysticks, keyboard,
or human motion capture devices, have been more focused on
fast programming for endpoint movement trajectory planning
and control. Such interfaces may be efficient for simple tasks
that depend only on position. However, they are hardly appli-
cable for complicated interactions, especially when regarding
scenarios where robots physically interact with the environment
including humans and where stiffness profiles in addition to
position trajectories need to be properly regulated [3]–[6].
Neuroscience studies have demonstrated how humans per-
form specific tasks by adapting limb muscle stiffness [7]. By
using synthesized visual and haptic feedback, a human demon-
strator is able to adjust his limb impedance to reduce the exter-
nal interference under the control of the central nervous system.
Variable impedance regulation widely exists in human task-
performing cases. When performing a particular task, a human
demonstrator could increase his limb force in a natural manner
when the resistance force becomes larger, and vice versa. The
impedance adaptive process plays a great role in such kinds of
tasks. Similarly, adaptive impedance control is also necessary
for robotic systems [8]–[10]. In our previous work [11]–[13],
we have applied variable impedance skill transfer to robot skill
learning scenarios. However, the work just focused on imitation
learning, which refers to the process that the robot is only able
to replay the learned motion skills exactly following what the
human tutor has demonstrated. This paper further investigates
the possibility for a robot to generalize the learned skills to new
situations using a variable stiffness strategy.
Transferring human limb stiffness, which can be adjusted
online in a real-time manner to a robot, is an effective way to
realize variable impedance skill transfer [11], [14]–[16]. The
electromyographic (EMG) signals extracted from human limbs
contain rich information of muscle activities, based on which
variation of human limb impedance can be effectively monitored
and estimated during a task execution. Compared with the other
methods [4], [6], [17], which take nonbiological ways to achieve
1083-4435 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
1194 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 23, NO. 3, JUNE 2018
Fig. 1. Procedure of the developed TbD system for skills learning and generalization.
variable gains, the EMG-based method could allow the transfer
of human impedance features to the robot. Therefore, the robot
can adapt to complex tasks and environments in a more direct
way [13].
In order to generalize skills obtained by imitation learning,
movement trajectories need to be encoded such that they can
be easily adapted to new situations. Dynamic movement prim-
itives (DMPs) are one of the most commonly used methods
to represent movements of humans and robots [18], [19]. The
DMPs model is represented by a set of differential equations that
can encode high-dimensional control policies. Thus far, several
types of DMPs models have been developed and successfully
utilized to learn a large number of skills such as ball-in-a-cup
[20], drumming [20], and serving water [21]. However, these
papers have only utilized the DMPs model to encode movement
trajectories.
Recently, stiffness/force adaptation has been investigated
based on this model. In [22], a DMPs method has been pre-
sented for variable stiffness scheduling, in which the gains are
represented using a function approximator. In [23], a DMPs
model is developed for the execution of bimanual or tightly cou-
pled cooperative tasks by coupling force/torque feedback into
the transform system. Steinmetz et al. [5] proposed a method to
simultaneously transfer positional and force requirements for in-
contact tasks. In [24], stiffness adaptation has been introduced
to assist human tutor to increase the intuitiveness of interac-
tion during teaching. Nemec et al. [25] proposed a method that
enables stiffness adaptation in path operational space, consid-
ering the variance of motion across multiple executions and
the current speed. These papers have verified the significance of
stiffness/force adaptation for robot interactions with the environ-
ment including humans. However, it has not been investigated
to model and learn the stiffness profiles in “muscle” space.
This paper proposes a framework that enables robots to ef-
ficiently learn both motor and stiffness control policies from
humans. To that end, human limb muscle activities are mon-
itored for variable stiffness estimation. The DMPs framework
is extended to generalize movement trajectories and stiffness
profiles. Additionally, a dual-arm control strategy with haptic
feedback mechanism is developed for skill transfer. During the
demonstration, the master arm of the robot is physically con-
nected with the human tutor’s hand and the slave arm follows
the motion of the master arm through the attached virtual spring
(see [13]). Finally, experimental studies are conducted to ver-
ify the approach on a Baxter robot. The whole framework is
depicted in Fig. 1.
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as
follows: 1) This paper presents a scheme combining EMG-based
variable impedance skill transfer with DMP-based motion se-
quence planning, inheriting the merits of these two aspects for
robotic skill acquisition; and 2) more importantly, the devel-
oped framework can simultaneously encode both trajectories
and stiffness profiles in a unified manner, which allows both
trajectory generalization and stiffness schedule.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. The methodol-
ogy is first presented in Section II. The experimental evaluation
is then presented in Section III. Finally, conclusion is given in
Section IV.
II. METHODOLOGY
In this part, the EMG-based variable stiffness estimation
method is introduced in Section II-A. Then, the teleoperation
control strategy is developed for dual-arm imitation movement
in Section II-B. In Section II-C, the DMPs framework for skill
representation is finally presented.
A. EMG-Based Variable Stiffness Estimation
This modality is developed to enable the robot to learn a
proper stiffness regulation strategy from the human tutor dur-
ing demonstrations. To do so, the human tutor’s limb endpoint
stiffness is estimated first. The EMG signals extracted from the
tutor’s arm are used to monitor the muscle activation for the
stiffness estimation. Subsequently, the estimated human end-
point stiffness profile is transferred to the robot as the gains in
the joint impedance controller.
The conservative congruence transformation between the
Cartesian stiffness and the stiffnesses of human arm is defined
as follows [26]:
Ken = J+T
h (qh )[Kj −
∂J+T
h (q)Fex
∂qh
∂qh ]J+
h (qh ) (1)
where Ken ∈ R6×6
and Kj ∈ R7×7
are the human arm endpoint
stiffness and joint stiffness, respectively. J+T
h ∈ R6×7
denotes
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
YANG et al.: DMPS-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR ROBOT LEARNING AND GENERALIZATION OF HUMANLIKE VARIABLE IMPEDANCE SKILLS 1195
Fig. 2. Position of the eight-channel MYO for stiffness estimation.
the pseudoinverse of the human arm Jacobian matrix, which
represents the arm posture, and qh ∈ R7
represents the arm
joint angles. Fex ∈ R6
is the external force that is applied at the
human arm endpoint.
Generally speaking, the joint stiffness of human arm Kj is
related to the muscle cocontraction activity, the posture of hu-
man arm, the muscle stretch reflex, etc. In this paper, a verified
effective and simplified estimation model of human arm joint
stiffness is employed [27], [28], where joint stiffness Kj is rep-
resented as multiplication of a muscle cocontraction indicator
α(p) and an intrinsic constant stiffness Kj , which can be identi-
fied at the condition of minimal muscle cocontractions, namely
Kj = α(p)Kj . The coefficient α(p) can be obtained by
α(p) = 1 +
λ1(1 − e−λ2p
)
(1 + e−λ2p )
(2)
where λ1 and λ2 are positive constant coefficients to be esti-
mated, and p is an indicator used to represent muscle activation
level. The indicator p can be obtained in a two-step way: a low-
pass filter (finite impulse response filter with a cutoff frequency
of 100 Hz) and a moving average technique are first used to
extract an envelope of the raw EMG signals from each of N
channels using an EMG extraction device MYO. There are total
N = 8 channels of the EMG signals used in this paper. MYO
is worn on the upper arm to collect raw EMG data from the
muscles, as shown in Fig. 2. An example of EMG envelope is
shown in Fig. 3.
The moving average process takes the following equation:
f(At) =
1
W
W −1

k=0
EMG(At−k ) (3)
where f(At) represents the amplitude of the envelope, W repre-
sents the window size, which is set at 40 samples (at a sampling
rate of 100 Hz). EMG(Ak ) indicates the amplitude of the raw
EMG signal, which is detected from one channel. k and t are the
sampling point and time, respectively. Then, the indicator p can
be calculated by summing the absolute values of the amplitudes
of the envelope of the EMG signals, as shown in the following
Fig. 3. Example of EMG enveloping by using a low-pass filter and
moving average method. The blue line represents the raw EMG signals.
The red line is the filtered stiffness coefficient representing limb muscle
activities.
equation [13]:
p =
N

i=1
|fi(At)|. (4)
Therefore, there are three parameters, i.e., the constant coeffi-
cients λ1, λ2, and the intrinsically constant joint stiffness matrix
Kj , that have to be estimated. These parameters can be estimated
by minimizing the Frobenius norm of the following expression
which is derived from (1):
α(p)Kj −
∂J+T
h (q)Fex
∂qh
− JT
h (qh )KenJh (qh ) (5)
where the human arm Cartesian stiffness Ken ∈ R6×6
can be
identified in an indirect way [27].
The human arm Jacobian Jh is responsible for considering
the geometrical change of the endpoint stiffness profile. To cal-
culate Jh , a human arm kinematic model, i.e., the D–H model, is
utilized to represent the simplified human arm kinematics (see
[29] for details). It represents the human arm as a model with
7 degrees of freedom (DoFs) : 3 DoFs on the shoulder, 2 DoFs
on the elbow, and 2 DoFs on the wrist. The calculation of the
human arm joint angles is realized by measuring the quater-
nions obtained from two inertial measurement units, and then
converting them to the joint angles according to [12].
B. Dual-Arm Control Strategy for Demonstration
A teleoperation-based kinesthetic teaching strategy is utilized
for the realization of human-to-robot skills transfer in a teaching
phase based on a dual-arm robot platform. A dual-arm control
strategy is accordingly designed to achieve this goal. One of the
two arms is used as the master arm and the other as the slave
arm, and the master arm is connected to the human tutor’s hand
by using a mechanical coupling interface. The human tutor takes
the master arm to move and the robot slave arm synchronously
follows the motion to execute a specific task. Compared to the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
1196 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 23, NO. 3, JUNE 2018
traditional way of demonstration, in which the human tutor
may hold and drive the slave arm directly, this indirect way of
demonstration (teleoperation) can make the human tutor adapt
his muscle activity and the corresponding Cartesian stiffness
more naturally. This process can be considered as imitation
learning.
A haptic feedback mechanism integrated into the dual-arm
control is provided to the human tutor, which contributes to
stimulating the human tutor’s muscle activation for the stability
improvement of the task execution. A virtual spring-damping
system is attached between the robot two arms. The human
tutor’s hand is connected to the robot master arm using a me-
chanical interface [13]. The slave arm follows the motion of
the master arm in both Cartesian space and joint space under
the designed control mode. Due to the movement tracking error
between the two arms, a virtual resistance force is generated
as haptic feedback and provided to the human tutor. Thus, the
tutor is able to “feel” the motion error in a real-time manner and
can regulate his muscle strength to compensate for the error. We
leave the detail of the dual-arm control strategy to [13].
C. Dynamical Movement Primitives for Skill
Representation
In this section, the DMPs model learned from multiple
demonstrations is first introduced for position trajectory adap-
tation. Furthermore, this DMPs framework is also extended for
the stiffness adaptation.
1) DMPs for Trajectory Planning: Generally, DMPs models
can be classified into two types, i.e., the Discrete DMPs and the
Rhythmic DMPs with respect to different kinds of tasks. For
the realization of the experimental task, i.e., the cutting task,
the former type is used in this paper. A typical DMPs mode
can be seen as a spring-damping system, which is derived by a
canonical system. The model is defined as follows [18]–[19]:
τv̇ = k(g − x) − dẋ + (g − x0)f(s) (6)
τẋ = v (7)
where x denotes the position of the robot endpoint or joint angle,
and v is the velocity. k and d represent the spring and damping
coefficients of the system, respectively. The positive constant τ
is the temporal scaling coefficient. By adjusting the coefficient
τ, duration of a task would be accordingly changed. x0 and g
denote the initial and goal position, respectively. The external
force term f(s) is a nonlinear continuous bounded function. s
is the state of a first-order dynamic system, i.e., the canonical
system, which shares the same temporal constant τ
τṡ = −αss, s ∈ [0, 1]; s(0) = 1 (8)
where the predefined constant is represented by αs.
The state s can be seen as a phase variable, which is set to
monotonically decrease from 1 to 0. When s converges to zero,
the external force term vanishes at the target point [see (9)]. Due
to the canonical system, the DMPs model depends not on time
but on the state s, which makes it possible to easily generalize
the model to be suitable for other situations without changing
the movement trajectory.
The nonlinear function f(s) is defined by
f(s) =
N

i=1
γiφi(s)s (9)
with
φi(s) =
exp(−hi(s − ci)2
)
N
j=1 exp(−hj (s − cj )2)
(10)
where φi(s) is considered as a normalized radial basis function
with the center ci and the width hi. Each basis function hi is
weighted by γi. N denotes the number of the Gaussian functions
that need to be used in the model. The parameters ci, hi, and N
are determined in accordance to the situation of a task.
A supervised learning process is needed for parameter esti-
mation. Given a single demonstration, we obtain the target force
ftarget(s) as follows:
ftarget(s) =
τv̇ + dẋ − k(g − x)
g − x0
. (11)
Then, the weights γ of DMPs model are calculated using
locally weighted regression
min

(ftarget(s) − f(s))2

. (12)
There are three basic advantages of the DMPs model, which
are follows:
1) the generated movement adapts to a new goal g with a
smooth trajectory, which is similar to the original one;
thus, the model is spatially generalized;
2) the model can be generalized in temporal dimension just
by changing the temporal constant τ without affecting
the shape of the movement trajectory; and
3) by adding coupling terms to the differential equation (6),
the modified model is then able to have other abilities such
as avoiding static or moving obstacles [21] and robustness
to external perturbations [30].
2) DMPs for Stiffness Schedule: In [17], [22], and [31], the
control policy K (i.e., the gain of the robot joint impedance
controller) is represented by a function approximator
K =
M

i=1
ωiϕi(s) (13)
where ϕi(s) are basis functions. ωi are weighting parameters,
which are calculated via a supervised learning algorithm and
optimized via a reinforcement learning algorithm.
In fact, the function approximator is analogous to the force
function, i.e., f(s) in (9). Their framework only utilized a part of
the DMPs model due to the lack of a reference stiffness profile
that can be used for imitation learning. Therefore, it is only able
to inherit parts of the merits of the DMPs model. There are three
shortcomings of this framework, which are as follows.
1) The initial stiffness is set to be a constant value, and it
needs a learning process for the robot to obtain a variable
stiffness profile. Thus, their framework is not efficient in
transferring skills from humans to a robot.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
YANG et al.: DMPS-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR ROBOT LEARNING AND GENERALIZATION OF HUMANLIKE VARIABLE IMPEDANCE SKILLS 1197
Fig. 4. Extended framework of the DMPs system. Two sets of transform systems are used to represent for position trajectories and stiffness
profiles, respectively. The two systems are driven by the same canonical system using the same temporal scaling coefficient τ in order to satisfy
phase synchronization.
2) The stiffness cannot be directly generalized to other sit-
uations, i.e., the amplitude and duration cannot be easily
adjusted to suit for similar tasks with different require-
ments.
3) It is not allowed to be used in such scenarios where it
only has one shot to finish a task because the trial-and-
error process is needed to learn the stiffness. Taking the
example of cutting, we would like the robot to cut an
object in one time but not try several times to achieve a
proper stiffness profile. Many similar examples can be
found in industrial applications.
In order to overcome these shortcomings, we extend the
framework in this paper based on the idea that a complete
motion process of a robot should include both position
trajectories and stiffness profiles. Robots, just like humans,
should be capable of both trajectory adaptation and stiffness
adaptation such that they are able to learn and generalize highly
humanlike skills. To that end, representation of trajectories and
stiffness profiles can be treated equally. Inspired by [19], our
extended framework can be described as:
ṡ = h(s) (14)
ẋ = g1(x, s, γ) (15)
ṗ = g2(p, s, ω) (16)
where h(s) is the canonical system and it is represented by (8).
Equations (15) and (16) show the two transform systems that
one is used to encode position trajectories and another one for
stiffness profiles. The output of the stiffness DMPs model, i.e.,
Ωi = {pi, ṗi} is also obtained from (18). Note that these two
transform systems are driven by the same canonical system such
that the phase synchronization can be guaranteed. It means that
the appropriate stiffness can be provided to the robot arm when
it is needed. We use the notation p to represent the stiffness
because the variable stiffness is evaluated from EMG signals
and it can be seen as a stiffness indicator (see Section II-A). We
compute the stiffness DMPs model using the indicator [see (4)]
instead of the gains of all joints to reduce the computations.
The whole framework is demonstrated in Fig. 4 that is modi-
fied from [22]. The calculation procedure for stiffness DMPs is
similar to the process of movement DMPs and only needs minor
modifications, i.e., replacing the input x with p and choosing
proper parameters, such as the spring and damping coefficients,
and the number of basis functions.
To learn the weights from multiple demonstrations, we take a
direct way to determine the weights. First, each demonstration
is evaluated with a score of the scale from 1 to 10 according
to its corresponding performance. For each demonstration, a
coefficient κi is related to the scores πi and defined as follows:
κi =
πi
L
i=1 πi
(17)
where L is the total number of the demonstrations. Then, the
final DMPs output Ω = {x, ẋ, p} is computed as
Ω =
L

i=1
κiΩi. (18)
Thus, the multiple demonstrations can be integrated together
to yield a final output.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
1198 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 23, NO. 3, JUNE 2018
Fig. 5. Experimental setup for the cutting task during demonstration.
III. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
The humanoid dual-arm Baxter Research Robot (Baxter) de-
veloped by Rethink Robotics is used in our experimental study.
Each arm of the robot has 7 DoF, i.e., 2-DoF shoulder joint
(S0, S1), 2-DoF elbow joint (E0, E1), and 3-DoF wrist joint
(W0, W1, W2). The kinematics model of the robot arm has
been developed in the previous work [32]. Joint stiffness and
damping can be modified under torque control mode, which
is implemented by the proportion-derivative impedance control
law. The human tutor’s muscle activity is monitored using a
MYO device to collect raw EMG signals. Two tasks, cutting
and lift place, are illustrated to justify the effectiveness of the
proposed method.
A. Cutting Task
The setup is shown in Fig. 5. During demonstration, one
arm of the robot is used as the master arm, which is physically
attached to the human tutor’s limb endpoint through a specially
designed coupling device [13]. The other arm serves as a slave
arm, and a knife is mounted onto its endpoint as a cutting tool.
In the teaching phase, the human tutor drives the master arm to
move, and the slave arm follows the movement and learns the
patterns of the position trajectory and the stiffness profile of the
hand of the human tutor. While in the following reproduction
phase, the slave arm is able to reproduce and generalize the
learned skill without the assistance of the master arm.
First, in the teaching phase, the human tutor who has been
involved in the stiffness calibration demonstrates the cutting
skill through teleoperation ten times. The trajectories of the
seven joints as well as the tutor’s limb EMG signals are recorded
during each demonstration. Note that the EMG signals can be
evaluated in an almost real-time manner; thus, we can directly
record the EMG data and calculate the stiffness indicator p.
Then, a direct way of computing the mixture of movement
primitives [see (17) and (18)] is used to generate one output of
the DMPs model based on the multiple demonstrations. Note
that learning from multiple demonstrations is not the main con-
cern of this paper. Therefore, a qualitative criterion is employed
to determine the weight of each single demonstration. To that
end, each one of the three subjects gives a score ranging from
1 to 10 for each signal demonstration according to the task exe-
cution performance. If the system is unstable when the slave arm
contacts with the object or the object is not cut well eventually
during the demonstration, it will get a lower score, the weights
are calculated by using (17). One may also employ objec-
tive approaches for learning from multiple demonstrations (see,
e.g., [33]).
The spring coefficient k and damping coefficient d of the
DMPs model are set to 150 and 25, respectively. The numbers
of basis functions are chosen: 100 and 50 for the trajectories
DMPs and the stiffness DMPs, respectively. Once we achieve
the generated movement trajectories and stiffness profiles that
account for multiple demonstrations, the following two subtasks
are conducted.
1) Movement Trajectory Planning Using the DMPs Model: In
this subtask, we would like to extend the ability of DMPs model
for skill spatial generalization from position control mode to
impedance control mode. The goal is to generate the learned
skill to cut an object in different spatial positions. In our case,
it is designed to cut a cucumber in different positions along the
y-axis. The robot here is controlled in the EMG-based variable
impedance mode. Note that in position control mode, only paths
need to be planned, whereas in impedance control mode, both
the paths and velocities should be adjusted. The generalized
trajectories and velocities are achieved just by changing the
profile of the DMPs model, and they are shown in the top row in
Fig. 6. It demonstrates that the generalized trajectories are very
similar to the reference ones but converging to different goals.
The results of this subtask are shown in the bottom row
in Fig. 6. Fig. 6(c) shows the measured endpoint position in
y-axis of the robot slave arm. It demonstrates that the endpoint
could generalize spatially to different positions. Fig. 6(d) shows
the executed cuts. This subtask demonstrates that DMPs model
for skill spatial generalization can be successfully realized in
impedance control model.
2) Stiffness Schedule: One of the most important contribu-
tion of our proposed framework lies in the ability of generalizing
the stiffness profiles to suit for new given situations. This sub-
task aims to demonstrate this point. To that end, we generalize
the reference stiffness indicator (the reference terminal value
is 0.65) to two different goals, e.g., 0.8 and 0.9, based on the
extended DMPs model, which is shown in Fig. 7(a). A different
object is used for cutting in this subtask, which has a thicker
skin and larger hardness than the object used in the teaching
phase and the subtask above.
The robot is required to perform the subtask five times under
each one of the three conditions described above, resulting in a
successful rate of 0/5, 1/5, and 5/5, respectively. Fig. 7(b)–(f)
shows one typical result of this subtask. In this case, it shows
that the object cannot be successfully cut using the impedance
control mode with the reference variable stiffness. And when
the final stiffness value is generalized to 0.8, the subtask still
cannot be successfully finished. Until it is generalized to a higher
value, i.e., 0.9, the object can be successfully cut. Note that
there is a gap between the final positions of the reference and
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
YANG et al.: DMPS-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR ROBOT LEARNING AND GENERALIZATION OF HUMANLIKE VARIABLE IMPEDANCE SKILLS 1199
Fig. 6. T op: (a) and (b) are the planned trajectories for skill spatial generalization. Bottom: (c) is the measured robot endpoint position in y-axis;
(d) shows the executed cut locations on the cucumber, two sets of numbers (1–6) mean this subtask is successfully performed twice (six cuts once).
Cut no. 1 refers to the demonstrated one, and the others refer to the generalized ones. The solid lines denote the reference trajectories obtained
from imitation learning and the dash lines denote the generalized ones.
Fig. 7. T op : (a) is the generalization of the stiffness indicator profile to different goals. (b) and (c) are the measured positions and forces of the
slave arm end-effector in z-axis, respectively. Bottom shows the different cuts by using the reference (d), the first generalized (e), and the second
generalized stiffness indicator profiles (f), respectively. The object can be cut successfully only by applying the second generalized stiffness profile.
Note that the object used to cut here is different from the object used in the first subtask, as shown in Fig. 6.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
1200 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 23, NO. 3, JUNE 2018
Fig. 8. Experimental setup for the lift-place task.
the second generalized trajectories, which represents the height
of the object [see Fig. 7(b)]. From the perspective of force [see
Fig. 7(c)], it can be seen that the robot lacks adaptability even
in variable impedance control mode if the desirable stiffness
profile is not properly generalized, which is consistent with our
common experience when people perform tasks.
B. Lift-Place Task
The setup for the lift-place task is shown in Fig. 8. There
are two different objects used in this task, objects 1 and 2 have
the same size (10 cm ×10 cm × 10 cm), but different weights:
0.83 and 1.40 kg, respectively. The experimental procedure of
this task is similar to the cutting task. During demonstration, the
same human tutor teaches the robot to lift the object 1, pass over
the obstacle (with a height of 18 cm), and finally place it on the
goal (the red cross mark). The human tutor is required to lift the
object at as low height as possible to pass it over the obstacle for
energy saving. After a given number of demonstrations, we can
generate one integrated position trajectory and one integrated
stiffness profile, as shown in Fig. 9. The parameters of the DMP
model are set as the same as in the cutting task.
During the playback phase, the robot is required to perform
the task under three different situations: subtask 1: to lift and
place the object 1 to a new given goal (the black cross mark),
which is 5 cm away from the old one, with the demonstrated
stiffness profile (i.e., trajectory spatial schedule); subtask 2:
to lift and place the object 2 to the new given goal with the
demonstrated stiffness profile (i.e., without stiffness schedule);
and subtask 3: to lift and place the object 2 to the new goal with
a generalized stiffness profile (i.e., both trajectory and stiffness
generalization).
Each subtask has been performed seven times. A success rate
of 7/7 is obtained in the first subtask, which shows the skill
spatial generalization has been successfully realized. The robot
has finished the second task and the third subtask with a success
rate of 1/7 and 6/7, respectively. The two comparative subtasks
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework for
stiffness schedule. Fig. 10 I–IV shows one typical example of
the demonstrations and the three subtasks, respectively.
Fig. 9. Trajectories (a) and stiffness profiles (b) of the lift-place task.
C. Discussion
It should be emphasized that subtask 2 in Section III-A and
subtask 3 in Section III-B are successfully performed just by
adapting the parameters of the DMPs model instead of teaching
the robot again or requiring additional time-consuming pro-
cess (e.g., [22] and [34]) for achieving the proper stiffness
profiles. Additionally, different combinations of the trajecto-
ries and the stiffness profiles can meet different requirements of
task situations based on the proposed framework. More specif-
ically, by combining different movement trajectories with the
same stiffness profile, skill spatial generalization under vari-
able impedance control mode can be realized (subtask 1 in
Section III-A and subtask 1 in Section III-B), and by com-
bining different stiffness profiles with the same movement tra-
jectory, then stiffness schedule can be realized (subtask 2 in
Section III-A), or both trajectories and stiffness profiles can be
simultaneously achieved (subtask 3 in Section III-B). Further-
more, the DMP-based framework is model free and available
for different robotic platforms.
The reference stiffness profile for stiffness generalization is
obtained based on the extraction of the EMG signals and the
subsequent calculation for the endpoint stiffness estimates. The
human endpoint stiffness estimation method used in this pa-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
YANG et al.: DMPS-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR ROBOT LEARNING AND GENERALIZATION OF HUMANLIKE VARIABLE IMPEDANCE SKILLS 1201
Fig. 10. Experimental results of the lift-place task: I-(a)–(e), II-(a)–(e), III-(a)–(e), and IV-(a)–(e) show one typical example of the demonstrations,
subtask 1, subtask 2, and subtask 3, respectively. The robot fails to perform subtask 2.
per has been proved useful for impedance regulation in [27].
Therefore, on one hand, the stiffness transfer and generaliza-
tion is achieved conveniently and efficiently; on the other hand,
the reference stiffness profile largely depends on the accura-
cies of the extracted EMG signals and the stiffness estimation
model. One may employ more complete stiffness estimation
model to improve the accuracy of the estimated reference stiff-
ness profile since the calculation efficiency of the estimation
during the demonstration phase is not a strict constraint in this
context.
Regarding the way, multiple demonstrations are used to gen-
erate a reference trajectory and a stiffness profile (see Fig. 9).
The weight of each single demonstration is determined in a qual-
itative way for simplicity. Other more objective methods such
as probabilistic movement primitives (e.g., [35]) can be utilized
to achieve the same purpose. Moreover, different human tutors
have different demonstrations during the skill transfer process.
Thus, it may help robots to achieve a better performance of
executing tasks by considering the variance between different
humans, namely learning from different human tutors.
The significance of stiffness adaptation for human-to-robot
skill transfer has been verified in [13]. The stiffness adaptive
process of the cutting task and the lift-place task can be seen
in Figs. 7(a) and 9(b), respectively. This paper introduces the
capability of stiffness generalization, and therefore enriches the
diversity of the human-to-robot variable impedance transfer. In
our tasks, the stiffness generalization refers to the regulation of
the stiffness profile according to the task requirement. Taking,
for example, the lift-place task, during the reaching step the
stiffness is expected to remain small, and it increases when
larger stiffness is required to lift a heavier object. Surely, it can
be decreased accordingly as shown in Fig. 9(b).
IV. CONCLUSION
We presented a novel framework for learning and generalizing
humanlike variable impedance skills. The goal was to enable a
robot to be capable of performing tasks in a humanlike way. The
merits of the EMG-based variable impedance control and the
DMP model were integrated into our method for human–robot
skills transfer. To do so, the human tutor’s upper limb EMG
signals were extracted to capture his muscle stiffness features.
The estimated endpoint stiffness profiles then served as variable
gains in the impedance controller. In this way, the human tutor is
able to naturally and intuitively transfer his impedance features
of a specific skill to the robot. The DMP framework was em-
ployed and extended for both trajectory and stiffness schedule.
It is worth noting that the stiffness planning and generalization
for skill transfer can be achieved using our proposed framework,
which is the first time to be reported in the literature to the best
of our knowledge.
The proposed framework was evaluated on a real robot with
multiple DoFs. The experimental results of the cutting and lift-
place tasks have demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed
framework. It should be also mentioned that our method can
be easily transplanted to other platforms, and this proposed
framework can also be applied to a number of potential ap-
plications, such as industrial robots, robotic exoskeletons, and
medical robotic systems, which are required to acquire human-
like manipulation skills.
In the future work, we will apply our method to perform more
complex tasks. For example, it can be applied to a human–robot
collaboration scenario, for instance a wood sawing task is per-
formed by a robot and a human collaborator (similar to [15]).
In these situations, research on the coordinated mechanism for
both movement generalization and stiffness scheduling would
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
1202 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 23, NO. 3, JUNE 2018
be essential. Furthermore, the stiffness scheduling mechanism
we established here can be combined with many other trajec-
tory expression tools, such as Gaussian mixture model, together
to achieve variable impedance control for robots, which could
enrich the diversity of the skills that robots are able to learn.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the editors and the anonymous
reviewers for their insightful comments that helped them to
improve the quality of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Billard, S. Calinon, R. Dillmann, and S. Schaal, “Robot programming
by demonstration,” in Springer Handbook of Robotics. New York, NY,
USA: Springer, 2008, pp. 1371–1394.
[2] S. Calinon, Robot Programming by Demonstration. Lausanne,
Switzerland: EPFL Press, 2009.
[3] P. Kormushev, S. Calinon, and D. G. Caldwell, “Imitation learning of
positional and force skills demonstrated via kinesthetic teaching and haptic
input,” Adv. Robot., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 581–603, 2011.
[4] L. Rozo, S. Calinon, D. G. Caldwell, P. Jimenez, and C. Torras, “Learning
collaborative impedance-based robot behaviors,” AAAI Conf. Artificial
Intell., Bellevue, WA, USA, 2013, pp. 1422–1428.
[5] F. Steinmetz, A. Montebelli, and V. Kyrki, “Simultaneous kinesthetic
teaching of positional and force requirements for sequential in-contact
tasks,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE-RAS 15th Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (Hu-
manoids), Nov. 2015, pp. 202–209.
[6] L. Rozo, S. Calinon, D. G. Caldwell, P. Jimenez, and C. Torras, “Learning
physical collaborative robot behaviors from human demonstrations,” IEEE
Trans. Robot., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 513–527, Jun. 2016.
[7] E. Burdet, R. Osu, D. W. Franklin, T. E. Milner, and M. Kawato, “The
central nervous system stabilizes unstable dynamics by learning optimal
impedance,” Nature, vol. 414, no. 6862, pp. 446–449, 2001.
[8] M. Howard, D. J. Braun, and S. Vijayakumar, “Transferring human
impedance behavior to heterogeneous variable impedance actuators,”
IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 847–862, Aug. 2013.
[9] F. Ficuciello, L. Villani, and B. Siciliano, “Variable impedance control of
redundant manipulators for intuitive human–robot physical interaction,”
IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 850–863, Aug. 2015.
[10] W. He and Y. Dong, “Adaptive fuzzy neural network control for a con-
strained robot using impedance learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 1174–1186, Apr. 2018.
[11] P. Liang, C. Yang, N. Wang, Z. Li, R. Li, and E. Burdet, “Implemen-
tation and test of human-operated and human-like adaptive impedance
controls on Baxter robot,” in Advances in Autonomous Robotics Systems.
New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2014, pp. 109–119.
[12] C. Yang, P. Liang, A. Ajoudani, Z. Li, and A. Bicchi, “Development of
a robotic teaching interface for human to human skill transfer,” in Proc.
2016 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Oct. 2016, pp. 710–716.
[13] C. Yang, C. Zeng, P. Liang, Z. Li, R. Li, and C. Y. Su, “Interface design of
a physical human-robot interaction system for human impedance adaptive
skill transfer,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 329–340,
Jan. 2018.
[14] B. Yuan, M. Sekine, J. Gonzalez, J. Tames, W. Yu, and B. Yuan, “Variable
impedance control based on impedance estimation model with EMG
signals during extension and flexion tasks for a lower limb rehabilitation
robotic system,” J. Novel Physiotherapies, vol. 3, no. 178, p. 2, 2013.
[Online]. Available: https://www.omicsonline.org/open-access/variable-
impedance-control-based-on-impedance-estimation-model-with-emg-
signals-during-extension-and-flexion-tasks-for-a-lower-limb-
rehabilitation-robotic-system-2165-7025-178.php?aid=19135
[15] L. Peternel, T. Petrič, E. Oztop, and J. Babič, “Teaching robots to cooperate
with humans in dynamic manipulation tasks based on multi-modal human-
in-the-loop approach,” Auton. Robots, vol. 36, no. 1–2, pp. 123–136, 2014.
[16] A. Ajoudani, Transferring Human Impedance Regulation Skills to Robots,
vol. 110. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2016.
[17] J. Buchli, F. Stulp, E. Theodorou, and S. Schaal, “Learning variable
impedance control,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 820–833, 2011.
[18] S. Schaal, P. Mohajerian, and A. Ijspeert, “Dynamics systems vs. optimal
control—A unifying view,” Prog. Brain Res., vol. 165, pp. 425–445, 2007.
[19] A. J. Ijspeert, J. Nakanishi, H. Hoffmann, P. Pastor, and S. Schaal, “Dynam-
ical movement primitives: Learning attractor models for motor behaviors,”
Neural Comput., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 328–373, 2013.
[20] A. Ude, A. Gams, T. Asfour, and J. Morimoto, “Task-specific generaliza-
tion of discrete and periodic dynamic movement primitives,” IEEE Trans.
Robot., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 800–815, Oct. 2010.
[21] H. Hoffmann, P. Pastor, D. H. Park, and S. Schaal, “Biologically-inspired
dynamical systems for movement generation: Automatic real-time goal
adaptation and obstacle avoidance,” in Proc. 2009 IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., May 2009, pp. 2587–2592.
[22] F. Stulp, J. Buchli, A. Ellmer, M. Mistry, E. A. Theodorou, and S. Schaal,
“Model-free reinforcement learning of impedance control in stochastic
environments,” IEEE Trans. Auton. Mental Develop., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 330–
341, Dec. 2012.
[23] A. Gams, B. Nemec, A. J. Ijspeert, and A. Ude, “Coupling movement
primitives: Interaction with the environment and bimanual tasks,” IEEE
Trans. Robot., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 816–830, Aug. 2014.
[24] M. Tykal, A. Montebelli, and V. Kyrki, “Incrementally assisted kinesthetic
teaching for programming by demonstration,” in Proc. 11th ACM/IEEE
Int. Conf. Human–Robot Interaction, 2016, pp. 205–212.
[25] B. Nemec, N. Likar, A. Gams, and A. Ude, “Human robot
cooperation with compliance adaptation along the motion tra-
jectory,” Auton. Robots, pp. 1–13, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10514-017-9676-3
[26] S.-F. Chen and I. Kao, “Conservative congruence transformation for joint
and Cartesian stiffness matrices of robotic hands and fingers,” Int. J. Robot.
Res., vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 835–847, 2000.
[27] A. Ajoudani, N. Tsagarakis, and A. Bicchi, “Tele-impedance: Teleoper-
ation with impedance regulation using a body–machine interface,” Int.
J. Robot. Res., vol. 31, no. 13, pp. 1642–1656, 2012.
[28] A. Ajoudani, C. Fang, N. G. Tsagarakis, and A. Bicchi, “A reduced-
complexity description of arm endpoint stiffness with applications to
teleimpedance control,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst., Sep. 2015, pp. 1017–1023.
[29] X. Ding and C. Fang, “A novel method of motion planning for an an-
thropomorphic arm based on movement primitives,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatronics, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 624–636, Apr. 2013.
[30] J. Kober, B. Mohler, and J. Peters, “Learning perceptual coupling for
motor primitives,” in Proc. 2008 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots. Syst.,
Sep. 2008, pp. 834–839.
[31] L. Zhijun, T. Zhao, F. Chen, Y. Hu, C.-Y. Su, and T. Fukuda, “Reinforce-
ment learning of manipulation and grasping using dynamical movement
primitives for a humanoid-like mobile manipulator,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatronics, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 121–131, Feb. 2018.
[32] Z. Ju, C. Yang, and H. Ma, “Kinematics modeling and experimental ver-
ification of Baxter robot,” in Proc. 33rd Chin. Control Conf., Jul. 2014,
pp. 8518–8523.
[33] S. Calinon, F. D’halluin, D. G. Caldwell, and A. G. Billard, “Handling
of multiple constraints and motion alternatives in a robot programming
by demonstration framework,” in Proc. 2009 9th IEEE-RAS Int. Conf.
Humanoid Robots, Dec. 2009, pp. 582–588.
[34] K. Kronander, M. Khansari, and A. Billard, “Incremental motion learning
with locally modulated dynamical systems,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 70,
pp. 52–62, 2015.
[35] A. Paraschos, E. Rueckert, J. Peters, and G. Neumann, “Model-free prob-
abilistic movement primitives for physical interaction,” in Proc. 2015
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots. Syst., Sep. 2015, pp. 2860–2866.
Chenguang Yang (M’10–SM’16) received the
B.Eng. degree in measurement and control from
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an,
China, in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree in con-
trol engineering from the National University of
Singapore, Singapore, in 2010.
He received postdoctoral training at Imperial
College London, London, U.K. His research in-
terests include robotics and automation.
Dr. Yang is a recipient of the Best Paper Award
from the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS and
a number of international conferences.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
YANG et al.: DMPS-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR ROBOT LEARNING AND GENERALIZATION OF HUMANLIKE VARIABLE IMPEDANCE SKILLS 1203
Chao Zeng received the M.S. degree in preci-
sion instruments and mechanics from Shanghai
University, Shanghai, China, in 2016. He is cur-
rently working toward the Ph.D. degree in pattern
recognition and intelligent system at the College
of Automation Science and Engineering, South
China University of Technology, Guangzhou,
China.
His research interests include human–robot
interaction, programming by demonstration, and
human–robot skill transfers.
Cheng Fang (M’17) received the Ph.D. de-
gree in mechanical design and theory from the
Robotics Research Institute, Beihang University,
Beijing, China, in 2013.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher
with the Humanoids and Human Centered
Mechatronics Lab, Italian Institute of Technol-
ogy, Genoa, Italy. His research interests include
human–robot interaction, musculoskeletal mod-
eling of human body, and task-motion planning
and control of anthropomorphic arms.
Wei He (M’12–SM’16) received his B.Eng. and
his M.Eng. degrees both in control theory and
engineering from College of Automation Sci-
ence and Engineering, South China University of
Technology (SCUT), China, in 2006 and 2008,
respectively, and his PhD degree in electrical
and computer engineering from Department of
Electrical & Computer Engineering, the National
University of Singapore (NUS), Singapore, in
2011. He is currently working as a full profes-
sor in School of Automation and Electrical Engi-
neering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China.
He has co-authored 2 book published in Springer and published over
100 international journal and conference papers. He has been awarded
a Newton Advanced Fellowship from the Royal Society, UK. He is a
recipient of the IEEE SMC Society Andrew P. Sage Best Transactions
Paper Award in 2017. He serves as an Associate Editor of IEEE Trans-
actions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, IEEE Transactions
on Control Systems Technology, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics: Systems and IEEE Access, and an Editor of IEEE/CAA
Journal of Automatica Sinica, Neurocomputing, and Journal of Intelligent
& Robotic Systems. He is the member of the IFAC TC on Distributed Pa-
rameter Systems, IFAC TC on Computational Intelligence in Control and
IEEE CSS TC on Distributed Parameter Systems. His current research
interests include robotics, distributed parameter systems and intelligent
control systems.
Zhijun Li (M’07–SM’09) received the Ph.D. de-
gree in mechatronics from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China, in 2002.
From 2003 to 2005, he was a Postdoc-
toral Fellow with the Department of Mechani-
cal Engineering and Intelligent Systems, Univer-
sity of Electro-Communications, Tokyo, Japan.
From 2005 to 2006, he was a Research Fellow
with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, and Nanyang Technological Univer-
sity, Singapore. Since 2012, he has been a Professor with the College of
Automation Science and Engineering, South China University of Technol-
ogy, Guangzhou, China. His research interests include service robotics,
teleoperation systems, nonlinear control, neural network optimization,
etc.
Dr. Li has been the Co-Chair of the Technical Committee on
Biomechatronics and Biorobotics Systems of the IEEE Systems, Man
and Cybernetics Society, and the Technical Committee on Neuro-
Robotics Systems of the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society, since
2016. He is an Editor-at-Large for the Journal of Intelligent and Robotic
Systems, and an Associate Editor for several IEEE transactions. He was
the General Chair and Program Chair of 2016 and 2017 IEEE Confer-
ence on Advanced Robotics and Mechatronics, respectively.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
