=== PDF PAGE 1 / PRINTED PAGE 943 ===
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2011

   Learning Stable Nonline
         With Gaussian M

                                  S. Mohammad Khansari-



  Abstract—This paper presents a method to learn discrete robot
motions from a set of demonstrations. We model a motion as a non-
linear autonomous (i.e., time-invariant) dynamical system (DS) and
deﬁne sufﬁcient conditions to ensure global asymptotic stability at
the target. We propose a learning method, which is called Stable
Estimator of Dynamical Systems (SEDS), to learn the parameters
of the DS to ensure that all motions closely follow the demonstra-
tions while ultimately reaching and stopping at the target. Time-
invariance and global asymptotic stability at the target ensures that
the system can respond immediately and appropriately to pertur-
bations that are encountered during the motion. The method is
evaluated through a set of robot experiments and on a library of
human handwriting motions.

  Index Terms—Dynamical  systems  (DS), Gaussian mixture
model,  imitation  learning,  point-to-point  motions,  stability
analysis.


                               I. INTRODUCTION

     E consider modeling of point-to-point motions,  i.e.,
      movements in space stopping at a given target [1].W
Modeling point-to-point motions provides basic components
for robot control, whereby more complex tasks can be decom-
posed into sets of point-to-point motions [1], [2]. As an example,
consider the standard “pick-and-place” task: First, reach for the
item, then after grasping, move to the target location, and ﬁnally,
return home after release.
  Programming by demonstration (PbD) is a powerful means
to bootstrap robot learning by providing a few examples of
the task at hand [1], [3]. We consider PbD of point-to-point
motions where motions are performed by a human demonstrator.
To avoid addressing the correspondence problem [4], motions
are demonstrated from the robot’s point of view by the user
that guides the robot’s arm passively through the task. In our
experiments, this is done either by back driving the robot or by
teleoperating it using motion sensors (see Fig. 1). We, hence,
focus on the “what to imitate” problem [4] and derive a means
to extract the generic characteristics of the dynamics of the




  Manuscript received June 24, 2010; revised December 16, 2010 and April
27, 2011; accepted June 3, 2011. Date of publication July 14, 2011; date of
current version October 6, 2011. This paper was recommended for publication
by Associate Editor S. Hutchinson and Editor K. Lynch upon evaluation of the
reviewers’ comments. This work was supported by the European Commission
through the European Union Project Adaptive Modular Architectures for Rich
Motor Skills under Contract FP7-ICT-248311.
  The  authors  are  with  the  School  of  Engineering,  Ecole  Poly-
technique  Federale  de  Lausanne,  Lausanne  1015,  Switzerland  (e-mail:
mohammad.khansari@epﬂ.ch; aude.billard@epﬂ.ch).
  Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
   Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TRO.2011.2159412


                                                        1552-3098/$26.0
                                                                        943

ear Dynamical Systems
Mixture Models

 Zadeh and Aude Billard





   Fig. 1.  Demonstrating motions by teleoperating a robot (left) using motion
   sensors or (right) by back driving it.


  motion. In this paper, we assume that the relevant features of
  the movement, i.e., those to imitate, are the features that appear
  most frequently, i.e., the invariants across the demonstration.
  As a result, demonstrations should be such that they contain
  the main features of the desired task, while exploring some of
  the variations allowed within a neighborhood around the space
  covered by the demonstrations.

  A. Formalism

   We formulate the encoding of point-to-point motions as con-
   trol law that is driven by autonomous dynamical systems (DS):
  Consider a state variable ξ ∈Rd that can be used to unambigu-
  ously deﬁne a discrete motion of a robotic system (e.g., ξ could
  be a robot’s joint angles, the position of an arm’s end-effector in
  the Cartesian space, etc.). Let the set of N given demonstrations
   {ξt,n, ˙ξt,n}Tt=0,n=1n ,N   be instances of a global motion model that
   is governed by a ﬁrst-order autonomous ordinary differential
  equation (ODE)
                                             ˙ξ = f(ξ) + ϵ                       (1)

  where f : Rd →Rd  is a nonlinear continuous and continu-
  ously differentiable function with a single equilibrium point
  ˙ξ∗= f(ξ∗) = 0, θ is the set of parameters of f, and ϵ represents
  a zero mean additive Gaussian noise. The noise term ϵ encapsu-
   lates both inaccuracies in sensor measurements and errors that
   result from imperfect demonstrations. The function ˆf(ξ) can be
  described by a set of parameters θ, in which the optimal values
  of θ can be obtained based on the set of demonstrations us-
  ing different statistical approaches.1 We will further denote the
  obtained noise-free estimate of f from the statistical modeling
  with ˆf throughout this paper. Our noise-free estimate will, thus,
  be
                                               ˙ξ = ˆf(ξ).                        (2)


     1Assuming a zero mean distribution for the noise makes it possible to estimate
   the noise free model through regression.


 00 © 2011 IEEE

=== PDF PAGE 2 / PRINTED PAGE 944 ===
944





Fig. 2.   Typical system’s architecture that illustrates the control ﬂow in a
robotic system as considered in this paper. The system is composed of two loops:
the inner loop that represents the robot’s dynamics and a low-level controller
and an outer loop that deﬁnes the desired motion at each time step. The learning
block is used to infer the parameters of motion θ from demonstrations.


  Given an arbitrary starting point ξ0 ∈Rd, the evolution of
motion can be computed by integrating from (2).
  Two observations follow from formalizing our problem using
(1) and (2): 1) The control law that is given by (2) will generate
trajectories that do not intersect, even if the original demonstra-
tions did intersect; and 2) the motion of the system is uniquely
determined by its state ξ. The choice of state variable ξ is, hence,
crucial. For instance, if one wishes to represent trajectories that
intersect in the state space, one should encode both velocity and
acceleration in ξ, i.e., ξ = [x; ˙x].
  The use of DS is advantageous in that it enables a robot to
adapt its trajectory instantly in the face of perturbations [5].
A controller that is driven by a DS is robust to perturbations
because it embeds all possible solutions to reach a target into
one single function ˆf. Such a function represents a global map
that speciﬁes on the ﬂy the correct direction for reaching the
target, considering the current position of the robot and the
target. In this paper, we consider two types of perturbations:
1) spatial perturbations that result from a sudden displacement
in space of either the robot’s arm or of the target; and 2) temporal
perturbations which result from delays in the execution of the
task.2
  Throughout this paper, we choose to represent a motion in
a kinematic coordinates system (i.e., the Cartesian or robot’s
joint space) and assume that there exists a low-level controller
that converts kinematic variables into motor commands (e.g.,
force or torque). Fig. 2 shows a schematic of the control ﬂow.
The whole system’s architecture can be decomposed into two
loops. The inner loop consists of a controller that generates the
required commands to follow the desired motion and a system
block to model the dynamics of the robot. Here, q, ˙q, and ¨q are
the robot’s joint angle and its ﬁrst and second time derivatives.


  2Note that we distinguish between spatial and temporal perturbations as
these result in different distortion of the estimated dynamics and, hence, require
different means to tackle these. Typically, spatial perturbations would result
from an imprecise localization of the target or from interacting with a dynamic
environment where either the target or the robot’s arm may be moved by an
external perturbation; temporal perturbations typically arise when the robot is
stopped momentarily due to the presence of an object or due to safety issues
(e.g., waiting until the operator has cleared the workspace).
         IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2011


Motor commands are denoted by u. The outer loop speciﬁes the
next desired position and velocity of the motion with respect
to the current status of the robot. An inverse kinematics block
may also be considered in the outer loop to transfer the desired
trajectory from the Cartesian to the joint space (this block is not
necessary if the motion is already speciﬁed in the joint space).
  In this control architecture, both the inner and outer loops
should be stable. The stability of the inner loop requires the
system to be input-to-state stable (ISS) [6], i.e., the output of the
inner loop should remain bounded for a bounded input. The sta-
bility of the outer loop is ensured when learning the system. The
learning block refers to the procedure that determines a stable
estimate of the DS to be used as the outer-loop control. In this
paper, we assume that there exists a low-level controller which is
not necessarily accurate,3 that makes the inner-loop ISS. Hence,
we focus our efforts on designing a learning block that ensures
stability of the outer-loop controller. Learning is data driven and
uses a set of demonstrated trajectories to determine the param-
eters θ of the DS that is given in (2). Learning proceeds as a
constraint optimization problem, satisfying asymptotic stability
of the DS at the target. A formal deﬁnition of stability is given
next.
  Deﬁnition 1: The function ˆf is globally asymptotically stable
at the target ξ∗if f(ξ∗) = 0 and ∀ξ0 ∈Rd; the generated motion
converges asymptotically to ξ∗, i.e.,
              t→∞ξtlim  = ξ∗    ∀ξ0 ∈Rd.               (3)
   ˆf is locally asymptotically stable if it converges to ξ∗only
when ξ0 is contained within a subspace D ⊂Rd.
  Nonlinear DS are prone to instabilities. Ensuring that the
estimate ˆf results in asymptotically stable trajectories, i.e., tra-
jectories that converge asymptotically to the attractor as per
Deﬁnition 1, is thus a key requirement for ˆf to provide a use-
ful control policy. In this paper, we formulate the problem to
estimate f and its parameters θ as a constrained optimization
problem, whereby we maximize accuracy of the reconstruction
while ensuring its global asymptotic stability at the target.
  The remainder  of  this  paper  is  structured  as  follows.
Section II reviews related works on learning discrete motions
and the shortcomings of the existing methods. Section III for-
malizes the control law as a stochastic system composed of a
mixture of Gaussian functions. In Section IV, we develop con-
ditions to ensure global asymptotic stability of nonlinear DS. In
Section V, we propose a learning method to build an ODE
model that satisﬁes these conditions. In Section VI, we quan-
tify the performance of our method to estimate the dynamics
of motions 1) against a library of human handwriting motions;
and 2) in two different robot platforms (i.e., the humanoid robot
iCub and the industrial robot Katana-T). We further demonstrate
how the resulting model from the proposed learning methods
can adapt instantly to temporal and spatial perturbations. We
devote Section VII to discussion, and ﬁnally, we summarize the
obtained results in Section VIII.


  3When controlled by a DS, the outer-loop controller can handle the inner-
loop controller’s inaccuracy by treating these as perturbations, comparing the
expected versus the actual state of the system.

=== PDF PAGE 5 / PRINTED PAGE 947 ===
KHANSARI-ZADEH AND BILLARD: LEARNING STABLE NONLINEAR DYNAMICA


information gain to determine the optimal subset of data points
[30]. These heuristics resemble that offered by the BIC, DIC, or
AIC criteria.
  Estimating f via a ﬁnite mixture of Gaussian functions, the
unknown parameters of ˆf become the prior πk, the mean μk
and the covariance matrices Σk of the k = 1 . . . K Gaussian
functions (i.e., θk = {πk, μk, Σk} and θ = {θ1 . . . θK }). The
mean and the covariance matrices of a Gaussian k are deﬁned
by
                μkξ            Σkξ  Σkξ ˙ξ
         μk =            ,  Σk =                       .         (4)
                μk                                               ˙ξ           Σk˙ξξ  Σk˙ξ
  Given a set of N demonstrations {ξt,n, ˙ξt,n}Tt=0,n=1,n ,N    each
recorded point in the trajectories [ξt,n, ˙ξt,n] is associated with a
probability density function P(ξt,n, ˙ξt,n):

              K                   ∀n ∈1 . . . N
P(ξt,n, ˙ξt,n; θ) =    P(k)P(ξt,n, ˙ξt,n|k)
                                                      t ∈0 . . . T n                k=1
                                                              (5)
where P(k) = πk is the prior, and P(ξt,n, ˙ξt,n|k) is the condi-
tional probability density function that is given by

 P(ξt,n, ˙ξt,n|k) = N(ξt,n, ˙ξt,n; μk, Σk)

         1
 =                 e−12 ([ξ t , n , ˙ξ t , n ]−μk )T (Σk )−1 ([ξ t , n , ˙ξ t , n ]−μk ). (6)
       (2π)2d|Σk|

  Taking the posterior mean estimate of P(˙ξ|ξ) yields (as de-
scribed in [31])

     K
           P(k)P(ξ|k)                 −1
   ˙ξ =     K             μk˙ξ + Σk˙ξξ Σkξ     ξ −μkξ    .  (7)
     k=1   i=1 P(i)P(ξ|i)

  The notation of (7) can be simpliﬁed through a change of
variable. Let us deﬁne
        ⎧
              Ak = Σk˙ξξ(Σkξ )−1        ⎪⎪⎪⎨
                    bk = μk                                                            ˙ξ                  −Akμkξ                        (8)

                                  P(k)P(ξ|k)        ⎪⎪⎪⎩ hk(ξ) =                              K                .
                                         P(i)P(ξ|i)
                                                                          i = 1

  The substitution of (8) into (7) yields

                   K
                       ˙ξ = ˆf(ξ) =    hk(ξ)(Akξ + bk).            (9)

                       k=1

   First observe that ˆf is now expressed as a nonlinear sum of
linear DS. Fig. 4 illustrates the parameters of (8) and their effects
on (9) for a 1-D model constructed with three Gaussians. Here,
each linear dynamics Akξ + bk corresponds to a line that passes
through the centers μk with slope Ak. The nonlinear weighting
terms hk(ξ) in (9), where 0 < hk(ξ) ≤1, give a measure of the
relative inﬂuence of each Gaussian locally. Observe that due
to the nonlinear weighting terms hk(ξ), the resulting function
ˆf(ξ) is nonlinear and ﬂexible enough to model a wide variety
of motions. If one estimates this mixture using classical meth-
ods such as EM, one cannot guarantee that the system will be
AL SYSTEMS WITH GAUSSIAN MIXTURE MODELS                         947





   Fig. 4.   Parameters that are deﬁned in (8) and their effects on ˆf(ξ) for a 1-D
  model constructed with three Gaussians. See the text for further information.


  asymptotically stable. The resulting nonlinear model ˆf(ξ) usu-
  ally contains several spurious attractors or limit cycles even for
  a simple 2-D model (see Fig. 3). Next, we determine sufﬁcient
  conditions on the learning parameters θ to ensure asymptotic
  stability of ˆf(ξ).


                     IV. STABILITY ANALYSIS

    The stability analysis of DS is a broad subject in the ﬁeld
  of dynamics and control, which can generally be divided into
  linear and nonlinear systems. Stability of linear dynamics has
  been studied extensively [19], where a linear DS can be written
  as

                                             ˙ξ = Aξ + b.                    (10)

    Asymptotic stability of a linear DS that is deﬁned by (10) can
  be ensured by solely requiring that the eigenvalues of the matrix
 A be negative. In contrast, the stability analysis of nonlinear
 DS is still an open question, and theoretical solutions exist only
  for particular cases. Beware that the intuition that the nonlinear
  function ˆf(ξ) should be stable if all eigenvalues of matrices Ak,
  k = 1 . . . K, have strictly negative real parts is not true. Here is
  a simple example in 2-D that illustrates why this is not the case,
  as well as why estimating stability of nonlinear DS, even in 2-D
   is nontrivial.
    Example: Consider the parameters of a model with two Gaus-
  sian functions to be
   ⎧
                   3  0
               ξ = Σ2ξ =                   0  3   ⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨ Σ1
           −3  −30          −3   3        (11)       =                                            ,   Σ2                    =                   ˙ξξ                                                               ˙ξξ               3   −3                              −30  −3   ⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩ Σ1
        μ1ξ = μ2ξ = μ1˙ξ = μ2˙ξ = 0.

    Using (8), we have
     ⎧
     ⎨     −1  −10        −1   1          A1 =                     , A2 =
                  1   −1         −10  −1       (12)
     ⎩
               b1 = b2 = 0.

    The eigenvalues of the two matrices A1 and A2 are complex
  with values −1 ± 3.16i. Hence, each matrix determines a stable

=== PDF PAGE 6 / PRINTED PAGE 948 ===
948





Fig. 5.  While each of the subsystems (left) ˙ξ = A1ξ and (center) ˙ξ = A2ξ is
asymptotically stable at the origin, a nonlinear weighted sum of these systems
(right) ˙ξ = h1(ξ)A1ξ + h2(ξ)A2ξ may become unstable . Here, the system
remains stable only for points on the line ξ2 = ξ1 (drawn in black).


system. However, the nonlinear combination of the two matri-
ces, as per (9), is stable only when ξ2 = ξ1 and is unstable in
Rd \ {(ξ2, ξ1)|ξ2 = ξ1} (see Fig. 5).
  Next, we determine sufﬁcient conditions to ensure global
asymptotic stability of a series of nonlinear DS given by (7).
  Theorem 1: Assume that the state trajectory evolves according
to (9). Then, the function that is described by (9) is globally
asymptotically stable at the target ξ∗in Rd if

          (a) bk = −Akξ∗
                              ∀k = 1 . . . K      (13)
          (b) Ak + (Ak)T ≺0

where (Ak)T  is the transpose of Ak, and . ≺0 refers to the
negative deﬁniteness of a matrix.5
  Proof: We start the proof by recalling the Lyapunov con-
ditions for asymptotic stability of an arbitrary dynamical sys-
tem [19].
  Lyapunov Stability Theorem: A dynamical system that is de-
termined by the function  ˙ξ = ˆf(ξ) is globally asymptotically
stable at the point ξ∗if there exists a continuous and continu-
ously differentiable Lyapunov function V (ξ)  : Rd →R such
that
  ⎧
  ⎪⎨ (a) V (ξ) > 0        ∀ξ ∈Rd,          ξ̸ = ξ∗
      (b) ˙V (ξ) < 0        ∀ξ ∈Rd,          ξ̸ = ξ∗      (14)
  ⎪⎩
       (c) V (ξ∗) = 0,               ˙V (ξ∗) = 0.

  Note that ˙V  is a function of both ξ and ˙ξ. However, since ˙ξ
can be directly expressed in terms of ξ using (9), one can ﬁnally
infer that ˙V only depends on ξ.
  Consider a Lyapunov function V (ξ) of the form

               1
       V (ξ) = 2(ξ −ξ∗)T (ξ −ξ∗)    ∀ξ ∈Rd.      (15)

  Observe ﬁrst that V (ξ) is a quadratic function and, hence,
satisﬁes condition (14a). Condition that is given by (14b) follows
from taking the ﬁrst derivative of V (ξ) with respect to time; we



  5A d × d real symmetric matrix A is positive deﬁnite if ξT Aξ > 0 for all
nonzero vectors ξ ∈Rd , where ξT  denotes the transpose of ξ. Conversely,
A is negative deﬁnite if ξT Aξ < 0. For a nonsymmetric matrix, A is positive
(negative) deﬁnite if and only if its symmetric part ˜A = (A + AT )/2 is positive
(negative) deﬁnite.
         IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2011


have
         dV   dV dξ
    ˙V (ξ) =   =
           dt    dξ dt

         1 d
     =       (ξ −ξ∗)T (ξ −ξ∗)   ˙ξ
         2 dξ
     = (ξ −ξ∗)T ˙ξ = (ξ −ξ∗)T ˆf(ξ)

               K
     = (ξ −ξ∗)T    hk(ξ)(Akξ + bk)

                   k=1

                    = ˙ξ (see(9))

               K
     = (ξ −ξ∗)T    hk(ξ)(Ak(ξ −ξ∗) + Akξ∗+ bk )

                   k=1
                                       =0 (see(13a))

               K
     = (ξ −ξ∗)T    hk(ξ)Ak(ξ −ξ∗)

                   k=1

        K
     =    hk(ξ) (ξ −ξ∗)T Ak(ξ −ξ∗)

          k=1
                  hk >0     <0 (see(13b))

     < 0  ∀ξ ∈Rd,     ξ̸ = ξ∗.                       (16)

Conditions that are given by (14c) are satisﬁed when substituting
ξ = ξ∗into (15) and (16)

             1
    V (ξ∗) = 2(ξ −ξ∗)T (ξ −ξ∗) ξ=ξ ∗= 0             (17)

           K
        ˙V (ξ∗) =    hk(ξ)(ξ −ξ∗)T Ak(ξ −ξ∗)   = 0. (18)

             k=1                          ξ=ξ ∗

  Therefore, an arbitrary ODE function ˙ξ = ˆf(ξ) that is given
by (9) is globally asymptotically stable if conditions of (13) are
satisﬁed.                                  ■
  Conditions (13a) and (13b) are sufﬁcient to ensure that an ar-
bitrary nonlinear function that is given by (9) is globally asymp-
totically stable at the target ξ∗. Such a model is advantageous
in that it ensures that starting from any point in the space, the
trajectory (e.g., a robot arm’s end effector) always converges to
the target.

 V. LEARNING GLOBALLY ASYMPTOTICALLY STABLE MODELS

  Section IV provided us with sufﬁcient conditions whereby
the estimate ˆf(ξ) is globally asymptotically stable at the target.
It remains now to determine a procedure to compute unknown
parameters of (9), i.e., θ = {π1 . . . πK ; μ1 . . . μK ; Σ1 . . . ΣK }
such that the resulting model is globally asymptotically stable.
In this section, we propose a learning algorithm, which is called
SEDS, that computes optimal values of θ by solving an opti-
mization problem under the constraint of ensuring the model’s
global asymptotic stability. We consider two different candi-
dates for the optimization objective function: 1) log-likelihood
and 2) MSE. The results from both approaches will be evaluated
and compared in Section VI-A.

=== PDF PAGE 7 / PRINTED PAGE 949 ===
KHANSARI-ZADEH AND BILLARD: LEARNING STABLE NONLINEAR DYNAMICA


  SEDS-Likelihood: Using log-likelihood as a means to con-
struct a model

                    N  T n
       min J(θ) = −1         log P(ξt,n, ˙ξt,n|θ)     (19)
          θ         T
                      n=1 t=0

  subject to

    ⎧
                −Akξ∗                 bk =

           (b) Ak          +                   (Ak)T ≺0    ⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨ (a)
           (c) Σk ≻0            ∀k ∈1 . . . K      (20)
                  πk ≤1          (d) 0 <    ⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩             K
          (e)   k=1 πk = 1
where P(ξt,n, ˙ξt,n|θ) is given by (5), and T =  Nn=1 T n is the
total number of training data points. The ﬁrst two constraints
in (20) are stability conditions from Section IV. The last three
constraints are imposed by the nature of the Gaussian mixture
model to ensure that Σk are positive-deﬁnite matrices, priors
πk are positive scalars smaller than or equal to one, and sum of
all priors is equal to one (because the probability value of (5)
should not exceed 1).
  SEDS-MSE: Using MSE as a means to quantify the accuracy
of estimations that are based on demonstrations6

                     N  T n
        min J(θ) =                     1              ∥ˆ˙ξt,n −˙ξt,n∥2       (21)
            θ        2T
                        n=1 t=0
subject to the same constraints as given by (20). In (21), ˆ˙ξt,n =
ˆf(ξt,n) are computed directly from (9).
  Both SEDS-Likelihood and SEDS-MSE can be formulated
as a Nonlinear Programming (NLP) problem [32] and can be
solved using standard constrained optimization techniques. We
use a Successive Quadratic Programming (SQP) approach that
relies on a quasi-Newton method7 to solve the constrained opti-
mization problem [32]. SQP minimizes a quadratic approxima-
tion of the Lagrangian function over a linear approximation of
the constraints.8
  Our implementation of SQP has several advantages over gen-
eral purpose solvers. First, we have an analytic expression of


  6In our previous work [5], we used a different MSE cost function, which
balanced the effect of following the trajectory and the speed. See Appendix A
for a comparison of results using both cost functions and further discussion.
  7Quasi-Newton methods differ from classical Newton methods in that they
compute an estimate of the Hessian function H(ξ) and, thus, do not require a
user to provide it explicitly. The estimate of the Hessian function progressively
approaches to its real value as optimization proceeds. Among quasi-Newton
methods, we use Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfard–Shanno [32].
  8Given the derivative of the constraints and an estimate of the Hessian and
the derivatives of the cost function with respect to the optimization parameters,
the SQP method ﬁnds a proper descent direction (if it exists) that minimizes the
cost function while not violating the constraints. To satisfy equality constraints,
SQP ﬁnds a descent direction that minimizes the cost function by varying
the parameters on the hypersurface that satisﬁes the equality constraints. For
inequality constraints, SQP follows the gradient direction of the cost function
whenever the inequality holds (inactive constraints). Only at the hypersurface
where the inequality constraint becomes active does SQP look for a descent
direction that minimizes the cost function by varying the parameters on the
hypersurface or toward the inactive constraint domain.
AL SYSTEMS WITH GAUSSIAN MIXTURE MODELS                         949





  the derivatives, improving signiﬁcantly the performances. Sec-
  ond, our code is tailored to solve the speciﬁc problem at hand.
  For example, a reformulation guarantees that the optimization
  constraints (20a), (20c), (20d), and (20e) are satisﬁed. There
   is, thus, no longer the need to explicitly enforce them during
  the optimization. The analytical formulation of derivatives and
  the mathematical reformulation to satisfy the optimization con-
  straints are explained in detail in [33].
    Note that a feasible solution to these NLP problems always
  exists. Algorithm 1 provides a simple and efﬁcient way to com-
  pute a feasible initial guess for the optimization parameters.
  Starting from an initial value, the solver tries to optimize the
  value of θ such that the cost function J is minimized. How-
  ever, since the proposed NLP problem is nonconvex, one cannot
  ensure to ﬁnd the globally optimal solution. Solvers are usu-
  ally very sensitive to initialization of the parameters and will
  often converge to some local minima of the objective function.
  Based on our experiments, running the optimization with the
   initial guess that is obtained from Algorithm 1 usually results in
  a good local minimum. In all experiments that are reported in
  Section VI, we ran the initialization three to four times, and use
  the result from the best run for the performance analysis.
   We use the BIC to choose the optimal set K of Gaussians.
  The BIC determines a tradeoff between optimizing the model’s
  likelihood and the number of parameters that are needed to
  encode the data
                               np
              BIC = T J(θ) +    log(T )             (22)
                              2
  where J(θ) is the normalized log-likelihood of the model that
   is computed using (19), and np  is the total number of free
  parameters. The SEDS-Likelihood approach requires the esti-
  mation of K(1 + 3d + 2d2) parameters (the priors πk, mean
  μk, and covariance Σk  are of size 1, 2d, and d(2d + 1),

=== PDF PAGE 8 / PRINTED PAGE 950 ===
950





Fig. 6.  Performance comparison of SEDS-Likelihood and SEDS-MSE through



respectively). However, the number of parameters can be re-
duced since the constraints given by (20a) provide an explicit
formulation to compute μk                       from other parameters (i.e., μkξ , Σkξ ,                                                         ˙ξ
and Σk˙ξξ). Thus, the total number of parameters to construct a
GMM with K Gaussians is K(1 + 2d(d + 1)). As for SEDS-
MSE, the number of parameters is even more reduced since
when constructing ˆf, the term Σk is not used and, thus, can be                                                                        ˙ξ
omitted during the optimization. Taking this into account, the
total number of learning parameters for the SEDS-MSE reduces
to K(1 + 32 d(d + 1)). For both approaches, learning grows lin-
early with the number of Gaussians and quadratically with the
dimension. In comparison, the number of parameters in the pro-
posed method is fewer than GMM and LWPR.9 The retrieval
time of the proposed method is low and in the same order of
GMR and LWPR.
  The  source  code  of SEDS  can  be downloaded from
http://lasa.epﬂ.ch/sourcecode/.

             VI. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATIONS

  Performance of the proposed method is ﬁrst evaluated against
a library of 20 human handwriting motions. These were chosen
as they provide realistic human motions while ensuring that
imprecision in both recording and generating motion is minimal.
Precisely, in Section VI-A, we compare the performance of
the SEDS method when using either the likelihood or MSE.
In Section VI-B, we validate SEDS to estimate the dynamics
of motion of two robot platforms: 1) the 7-DOF right arm of


  9The number of learning parameter in GMR and LWPR is K(1 + 3d + 2d2)
and 72 K(d + d2), respectively.
           IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2011





h a library of 20 human handwriting motions.



  the humanoid robot iCub and 2) the six DOF industrial robot
  Katana-T arm. In Sections VI-C and VI-D, we show that the
  method can learn second- and higher order dynamics that allows
  us to embed different local dynamics in the same model. Finally,
  in Section VI-E, we compare our method with those of four
  alternative methods GMR, LWPR, GPR, and BM.


  A. Stable Estimator of Dynamical Systems: Likelihood Versus
  Mean Square Error

     In Section V, we proposed two objective functions: likelihood
  and MSE for training the SEDS model. We compare the results
  that are obtained with each method for modeling 20 handwriting
  motions. The demonstrations are collected from pen input using
  a Tablet-PC. Fig. 6 shows a qualitative comparison of the esti-
  mate of handwriting motions. All reproductions were generated
  in simulation to exclude the error due to the robot controller
  from the modeling error. The accuracy of the estimate is mea-
  sured according to (23), with which the method accuracy in
  estimating the overall dynamics of the underlying model ˆf is
  quantiﬁed by measuring the discrepancy between the direction
  and magnitude of the estimated and observed velocity vectors
  for all training data points10





     10Equation (23) measures the error in our estimation of both the direction
  and magnitude of the velocity. It is, hence, a better estimate of how well our
  model encapsulates the dynamics of the motion, in contrast with an MSE on the
   velocity magnitude alone.

=== PDF PAGE 9 / PRINTED PAGE 951 ===
KHANSARI-ZADEH AND BILLARD: LEARNING STABLE NONLINEAR DYNAMICA



                      TABLE I
  PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF SEDS-LIKELIHOOD AND SEDS-MSE IN
            LEARNING 20 HUMAN HANDWRITING MOTIONS





          N  T n
        1                                  (˙ξt,n)T ˆ˙ξt,n      2
        ¯e =            r  1 −
        T           n=1 t=0           ∥˙ξt,n∥∥ˆ˙ξt,n∥+ ϵ

                                                                                          1
                           (˙ξt,n −ˆ˙ξt,n)T (˙ξt,n −ˆ˙ξt,n)    2
           + q                               (23)
                               ∥˙ξt,n∥∥˙ξt,n∥+ ϵ

where r and q are positive scalars that weigh the relative inﬂu-
ence of each factor,11 and ϵ is a very small positive scalar.
  The quantitative comparison between the two methods is
represented in Table I. SEDS-Likelihood slightly outperforms
SEDS-MSE in accuracy of the estimate, as seen in Fig. 6 and
Table I. Optimization with MSE results in a higher value of the
error. This could be due to the fact that (21) only considers the
norm of ˙ξ during the optimization, while when computing  ¯e,
the direction of ˙ξ is also taken into account [see (23)]. Although
one could improve the performance of SEDS-MSE by consider-
ing the direction of ˙ξ in (21), this would make the optimization
problem more difﬁcult to solve by changing a convex objective
function into a nonconvex one.
  SEDS-MSE is advantageous over SEDS-Likelihood in that it
requires fewer parameters (this number is reduced by a factor
of 12 Kd(d + 1)). On the other hand, SEDS-MSE has a more
complex cost function that requires computing GMR at each
iteration over all training data points. As a result, the use of
MSE makes the algorithm computationally more expensive, and
it has a slightly longer training time (see Table I).
  Following the previous observations that SEDS-Likelihood
outperforms SEDS-MSE in terms of accuracy of the recon-
struction and the training time, in the rest of the experiments,
we will use only SEDS-Likelihood to train the globally stable
model.12


B. Learning Point-to-Point Motions in the Operational Space

  We report on ﬁve robot experiments to teach the Katana-T
and the iCub robots to perform nonlinear point-to-point motions.
In all our experiments, the origin of the reference coordinates
system is attached to the target. The motion is, hence, controlled
with respect to this frame of reference. Such representation
makes the parameters of a DS invariant to changes in the target
position.




  11Suitable values for r and q must be set to satisfy the user’s design criteria
that may be task dependent. In this paper, we consider r = 0.6 and q = 0.4.
  12Note that in our experiments, the difference between the two algorithms in
terms of the number of parameters is small and, thus, is not a decisive factor.
AL SYSTEMS WITH GAUSSIAN MIXTURE MODELS                         951


    In the ﬁrst experiment, we teach a 6-DOF industrial Katana-
 T arm how to put small blocks into a container13 (see Fig. 7).
 We use the Cartesian coordinates system to represent the mo-
  tions. In order to have human-like motions, the learned model
  should be able to generate trajectories with both similar position
  and velocity proﬁles to the demonstrations. In this experiment,
  the task was shown to the robot six times and was learned us-
  ing K = 6 Gaussian functions. Fig. 7(a) illustrates the obtained
  results for generated trajectories starting from different points
  in the task space. The direction of motion is indicated by ar-
  rows. All reproduced trajectories are able to follow the same
  dynamics (i.e., having similar position and velocity proﬁle) as
  the demonstrations.
    Immediate adaptation: Fig. 7(b) shows the robustness of the
  model to the change in the environment. In this graph, the orig-
  inal trajectory is plotted in thin blue line. The thick black line
  represents the generated trajectory for the case where the target
   is displaced at t = 1.5 s. Having deﬁned the motion as au-
  tonomous DS, the adaptation to the new target’s position can be
  done instantly.
    Increasing accuracy of generalization: While convergence to
  the target is always ensured from conditions that are given by
  (13), due to the lack of information for points far from demon-
  strations, the model may reproduce some trajectories that are not
  consistent with the usual way of doing the task. For example,
  consider Fig. 8(a), i.e., when the robot starts the motion from
  the left side of the target, it ﬁrst turns around the container and
  then approaches the target from its right side. This behavior may
  not be optimal as one expects the robot to follow the shortest
  path to the target and reach it from the same side as the one it
  started from. However, such a result is inevitable since the infor-
  mation that is given by the teacher is incomplete, and thus, the
  inference for points that are far from the demonstrations are not
  reliable. In order to improve the task execution, it is necessary
  to provide the robot with more demonstrations (information)
  over regions that are not covered before. By showing the robot
  more demonstrations and retraining the model with the new
  data, the robot is able to successfully accomplish the task [see
  Fig. 8(b)].
    The second and third experiments consisted of having Katana-
 T robot place a saucer at the center of the tray and putting a cup
  on the top of the saucer. Both tasks were shown four times and
  were learned using K = 4 Gaussians. The experiments and the
  generalization of the tasks starting from different points in the
  space are shown in Figs. 9 and 10. Fig. 11 shows the adaptation
  of both models in the face of perturbations. Note that in this
  experiment, the cup task is executed after ﬁnishing the saucer
  task; however, for convenience, we superimpose both tasks in
  the same graph. In both tasks, the target (i.e., the saucer for the
  cup task and the tray for the saucer task) is displaced during the
  execution of the task at the time t = 2 s. In both experiments,
  the adaptation to the perturbation is handled successfully.



    13The robot is only taught how to move blocks. The problem of grasping the
  blocks is out of the scope of this paper. Throughout the experiments, we pose
   the blocks such that they can be easily grasped by the robot.

=== PDF PAGE 10 / PRINTED PAGE 952 ===
952





Fig. 7.  Katana-T arm that performs the experiment of putting small blocks
into a container. See the text for further information. (a) Ability of the model
to reproduce similar trajectories starting from different points in the space.
(b) Ability of the model to adapt its trajectory on the ﬂy to a change in the
target’s position.



  The fourth and ﬁfth experiments consisted of having the
7-DOF right arm of the humanoid robot iCub perform com-
plex motions, containing several nonlinearities (i.e., successive
curvatures) in both position and velocity proﬁles. Similar to
earlier, we use the Cartesian coordinates system to represent
these motions. The tasks are shown to the robot by teleoper-
ating it using motion sensors (see Fig. 1). Fig. 12 illustrates
the result for the ﬁrst task where the iCub starts the motion in
front of its face. Then, it does a semispiral motion toward its
right side, and ﬁnally at the bottom of the spiral, it stretches
forward its hand completely. In the second task, the iCub starts
the motion close to its left forehand. Then, it does a semicircular
motion upward and ﬁnally brings its arm completely down (see
Fig. 13). The two experiments were learned using ﬁve and four
Gaussian functions, respectively. In both experiments, the robot
is able to successfully follow the demonstrations and to gener-
         IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2011





Fig. 8.  Improving the task execution by adding more data for regions that are
far from the demonstrations. (a) Generalization based on the original model. (b)
Generalization after retraining the model with the new data.





Fig. 9.  Katana-T arm that performs the experiment of putting a saucer on a
tray.





Fig. 10.  Katana-T arm that performs the experiment of putting a cup on a
saucer.

=== PDF PAGE 11 / PRINTED PAGE 953 ===
KHANSARI-ZADEH AND BILLARD: LEARNING STABLE NONLINEAR DYNAMICA





Fig. 11.   Ability of the model to on-the-ﬂy adapt its trajectory to a change in
the target’s position. (a) Trajectory of reproductions. (b) Velocity proﬁle for the
saucer task. (c) Velocity proﬁle for the cup task.





Fig. 12.   First experiment with the iCub. The robot does a semispiral motion
toward its right side, and at the bottom of the spiral, it stretches forward its hand
completely.


alize the motion for several trajectories with different starting
points. Similar to what was observed in the three experiments
with the Katana-T robot, the models that are obtained for the
iCub’s experiments are robust to perturbations.

C. Learning Second-Order Dynamics

  So far, we have shown how DS can be used to model/learn
a demonstrated motion when modeled as a ﬁrst-order time-
invariant ODE. Although this class of ODE functions are generic
enough to represent a wide variety of robot motions, they fail
to accurately deﬁne motions that rely on second-order dynam-
ics such as a self-intersecting trajectory or motions for which
the starting and ﬁnal points coincide with each other (e.g., a
triangular motion). Critical to these kinds of motion is the am-
biguity in the correct direction of velocity at the intersection
point if the model’s variable ξ considered to be only the carte-
sian position (i.e., ξ = x ⇒˙ξ = ˙x). This ambiguity usually re-
sults in skipping the loop part of the motion. However, in this
AL SYSTEMS WITH GAUSSIAN MIXTURE MODELS                         953





   Fig. 13.  Second experiment with the iCub. The robot does a semicircle motion
  upward and brings its arm completely down.


  example, this problem can be solved if one deﬁnes the motion in
  terms of position, velocity, and acceleration, i.e., second-order
  dynamics:

                                       ¨x = g(x, ˙x)                     (24)

  where g is an arbitrary function. Observe that any second-order
  dynamics in the form of (24) can be easily transformed into a
  ﬁrst-order ODE through a change of variable, i.e.,

                          ˙x = v
                ⇒[˙x; ˙v] = f(x, v)          (25)
                               ˙v = g(x, v)

    Having deﬁned ξ = [x; v] and, thus, ˙ξ = [˙x; ˙v], (25) reduces
  to ˙ξ = f(ξ) and, therefore, can be learned with the methods that
  are presented in this paper. We verify the performance of our
  method in learning a second-order motion via a robot task. In
  this experiment, the iCub performs a loop motion with its right
  hand, where the motion lies in a vertical plane and, thus, contains
  a self-intersection point (see Fig. 14). Here, the task is shown to
  the robot ﬁve times. The motion is learned with seven Gaussian
  functions with SEDS-Likelihood. The results demonstrate the
  ability of SEDS to learn second-order dynamics.
   By extension, since any nth-order autonomous ODE can be
  transformed into a ﬁrst-order autonomous ODE, the proposed
  methods can also be used to learn higher order dynamics, how-
  ever, at the cost of increasing the dimensionality of the system. If
  the dimensionality of an nth-order DS is d, the dimensionality of
  the transformed dynamics into a ﬁrst-order DS is n × d. Hence,
  increasing the order of the DS is equivalent to increasing the di-
  mension of the data. As the dimension increases, the number of
  optimization parameters also increases. If one optimizes the val-
  ues of these parameters that are based on using a quasi-Newton
  method, the learning problem indeed becomes intractable as
  the number of dimensions increases. As an alternative solution,
  one can deﬁne the loop motion in terms of both the Cartesian
  position x and a phase variable. The phase-dependent DS has
  lower dimension (i.e., dimensionality of d + 1) compared with
  the second-order DS and is more tractable to learn. However, as
   it is already discussed in Section II, the use of the phase variable

=== PDF PAGE 13 / PRINTED PAGE 955 ===
KHANSARI-ZADEH AND BILLARD: LEARNING STABLE NONLINEAR DYNAMICA



                                                TABL
      PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF THE PROPOSED METHODS WITH ALTERN





                                                TABL
       PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF THE PROPOSED METHODS WITH ALTER
                                                                IN SECTIONS V





The models result from optimizing both objective functions
beneﬁt from the inherent characteristics of autonomous DS,
i.e., online adaptation to both temporal and spatial perturbation.
However, each objective function has its own advantages and
disadvantages. Using log-likelihood is advantageous in that it is
more accurate and smoother than MSE. Furthermore, the MSE
cost function is slightly more time consuming since it requires
computing GMR at each iteration for all training data points.
However, the MSE objective function requires fewer parameters
than the likelihood one which may make the algorithm faster
in higher dimensions or when higher number of components is
used.
  None of the two methods are globally optimal as they deal
with a nonconvex objective function. However, in practice, in
the 20 handwriting examples and the six robot tasks, which we
reported here, we found that SEDS approximation was quite
accurate. An assumption made throughout this paper is that
represented motions can be modeled with a ﬁrst-order time-
invariant ODE. While the nonlinear function that is given by (9)
is able to model a wide variety of motions, the method cannot be
used for some special cases that violate this assumption. Most
of the time, this limitation can be tackled through a change of
variable (as presented in our experiments; see Fig. 14).
  The stability conditions at the basis of SEDS are sufﬁcient
conditions to ensure global asymptotic stability of nonlinear
motions when modeled with a mixture of Gaussian functions.
Although our experiments showed that a large library of robot
motions can be modeled while satisfying these conditions, these
global stability conditions might be too stringent to accurately
model some complex motions. For these cases, the user could
choose local approaches such as BM to accurately model desired
motions.
AL SYSTEMS WITH GAUSSIAN MIXTURE MODELS                         955



LE II
 NATIVE APPROACHES IN LEARNING 20 HUMAN HANDWRITING MOTIONS





LE III
 RNATIVE APPROACHES IN LEARNING ROBOT EXPERIMENTS PRESENTED
 VI-B AND C





    While, in Section VI-C, we showed how higher order dy-
  namics can be used to model more complicated movements,
  determining the model order is deﬁnitely not a trivial task. It
  relies on having a good idea of what matters for the task at
  hand. For instance, higher order derivatives are useful to control
  for smoothness, jerkiness, and energy consumption and, hence,
  may be used if the task requires optimizing for such criteria.
    Incremental learning is often crucial to allow the user to reﬁne
  the model in an interactive manner. At this point in time, the
 SEDS training algorithm does not allow for incremental retrain-
  ing of the model. If one was to add new demonstrations after
  training the model, one would have to either retrain entirely the
  model that is based on the combined set of old and new demon-
  strations or build a new model from the new demonstrations
  and merge it with the previous model.15 For a ﬁxed number of
  Gaussians, the former usually results in having a more accurate
  model, while the latter is faster to train (because it only uses the
  new set of demonstrations in the training).
    Ongoing work is directed at designing an online learning ver-
  sion of SEDS whereby the algorithm optimizes the parameters
  of the model incrementally as the robot explores the space of
  motion. This algorithm would also allow for the user to provide
  corrections and, hence, to reﬁne the model locally, along the
  lines that we followed in [34].
    Furthermore, we are currently endowing the method with
  the on-the-ﬂy ability to avoid possible obstacle(s) during the


    15Two GMM with K 1 and K 2 number of Gaussian functions can be merged
   into a single model with K = K 1 + K 2 Gaussian functions by concatenating
   their parameters, i.e., θ = {θ1 . . . θK 1 . . . θK }, where θk = {πk , μk , Σk }.
  The resulting model is no longer (locally) optimal; however, it could be an
   accurate estimation of both models, especially when there is no overlapping
  between the two models.

=== PDF PAGE 14 / PRINTED PAGE 956 ===
956


execution of a task. We will also focus on integrating physical
constraints of the system (e.g., robot’s joints limit, the task’s
constraint, etc.) into the model to solve for this during our global
optimization. Finally, while we have shown that the system
could embed more than one motion and, hence, account for
different ways to approach the same target, depending on where
the motion starts in the workspace, we have still yet to determine
how many different dynamics can be embedded in the same
system.


                       VIII. SUMMARY

  DS offer a framework that allows for fast learning of robot
motions from a small set of demonstrations. They are also ad-
vantageous in that they can be easily modulated to produce
trajectories with similar dynamics in areas of the workspace
that is not covered during training. However, their application
to robot control has been given little attention so far, mainly
because of the difﬁculty of ensuring stability. In this paper, we
presented an optimization approach for statistically encoding a
dynamical motion as a ﬁrst-order autonomous nonlinear ODE
with Gaussian Mixtures. We addressed the stability problem of
autonomous nonlinear DS and formulated sufﬁcient conditions
to ensure global asymptotic stability of such a system. Then,
we proposed two optimization problems to construct a globally
stable estimate of a motion from demonstrations.
  We compared performance of the proposed method with cur-
rent widely used regression techniques via a library of 20 hand-
writing motions. Furthermore, we validated the methods in dif-
ferent point-to-point robot tasks that are performed with two
different robots. In all experiments, the proposed method was
able to successfully accomplish the experiments in terms of high
accuracy during reproduction, the ability to generalize motions
to unseen contexts, and the ability to adapt on the ﬂy to spatial
and temporal perturbations.


                    APPENDIX A

 COMPARISON WITH THE COST FUNCTION DESCRIBED IN [5]

  In our previous work [5], we had used a different MSE cost
function from that proposed in this paper that balanced the error
in both position and velocity

                   N  T n
                  1
       min J(θ) =             ωξ∥ˆξn(t) −ξt,n∥2
          θ     N
                     n=1 t=0
           + ω ˙ξ∥ˆ˙ξn(t) −˙ξt,n∥2   .             (26)

ˆ˙ξn(t) = ˆf(ˆξn(t)) are computed directly from  (9).  ˆξn(t) =
    t   i=0 ˆ˙ξn(i)dt generate an estimate of the corresponding demon-
strated trajectory ξn by starting from the same initial points as
that demonstrated, i.e., ˆξn(0) = ξ0,n ∀n ∈1 . . . N. ωξ and ω ˙ξ
are positive scalars weighing the inﬂuence of the position and
velocity terms in the cost function.
  In contrast with the cost function that is proposed in this pa-
per that assumes independence across data points [see (21)], the
aforementioned cost function propagates the effect of the esti-
         IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2011



                      TABLE IV
   EVALUATION OF THE EFFECT OF WEIGHTING TERMS ON THE MSE COST
                   FUNCTION PRESENTED IN [5]





mation error at each time step along each trajectory. Considering
only the error in speed removes these effects (i.e., less complex
optimization) while yielding nearly similar performance. For
example, when learning the 20 human handwriting motions that
are described in Section VI-A, using the cost function given in
(26) has yielded an average error of 0.23 (against an error of
0.25 when using only speed in the cost function; see Table I).
  Another difﬁculty that we avoid when considering solely one
term in our cost function is related to determining adequate
values for the weighting terms (in [5], their value were pre-
set to 1). To illustrate this issue, we ran the optimization on
four different handwriting motions by varying the weighting
terms given to the velocity and position, respectively. We report
on the accuracy as deﬁned in (23) for each of these runs in
Table IV. The weighting terms in the fourth column of Table IV
are obtained by normalizing the effect of the position and ve-
locity terms. One sees that the advantage of using either of the
velocity or position term is not clear cut. For instance, when
modeling motion 1, using only the velocity term provides the
best result. For motions 2 and 4, the model that is obtained from
the normalized weighting terms is more accurate, and the mo-
tion 3 is more accurate when the both weights are set equal. In
general, it is difﬁcult to say, a priori, which weights will result
in a more accurate model. This effect is due to the fact that when
the weights are changed, the shape of the cost function changes
as well in a nonlinear manner.


               ACKNOWLEDGMENT

  The authors would like to thank J. Peters, for his insightful
comments during the development of this paper, and E. Sauser,
for preparing the experimental setup with the iCub robot.


                   REFERENCES

 [1]  S. Schaal, “Is imitation learning the route to humanoid robots?” Trends
     Cognitive Sci., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 233–242, 1999.
 [2] D. Kulic, W. Takano, and Y. Nakamura, “Incremental learning, clustering
     and hierarchy formation of whole body motion patterns using adaptive
     hidden Markov chains,”  Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 761–784,
     2008.
 [3] A. Billard, S. Calinon, R. Dillmann, and S. Schaal, “Robot programming
     by demonstration,” in Handbook of Robotics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
     2008.
 [4] K. Dautenhahn and C. L. Nehaniv, The Agent-Based Perspective on Imi-
      tation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002, pp. 1–40.
 [5] S.-M. Khansari-Zadeh and A.  Billard, “Imitation learning of glob-
      ally  stable  non-linear  point-to-point robot motions using  nonlinear