=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
850 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 4, AUGUST 2015
Variable Impedance Control of Redundant
Manipulators for Intuitive Human–Robot
Physical Interaction
Fanny Ficuciello, Member, IEEE, Luigi Villani, Senior Member, IEEE, and Bruno Siciliano, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—This paper presents an experimental study on
human–robot comanipulation in the presence of kinematic redun-
dancy. The objective of the work is to enhance the performance
during human–robot physical interaction by combining Carte-
sian impedance modulation and redundancy resolution. Cartesian
impedance control is employed to achieve a compliant behavior of
the robot’s end effector in response to forces exerted by the hu-
man operator. Different impedance modulation strategies, which
take into account the human’s behavior during the interaction,
are selected with the support of a simulation study and then ex-
perimentally tested on a 7-degree-of-freedom KUKA LWR4. A
comparative study to establish the most effective redundancy res-
olution strategy has been made by evaluating different solutions
compatible with the considered task. The experiments have shown
that the redundancy, when used to ensure a decoupled apparent
inertia at the end effector, allows enlarging the stability region in
the impedance parameters space and improving the performance.
On the other hand, the variable impedance with a suitable mod-
ulation strategy for parameters’ tuning outperforms the constant
impedance, in the sense that it enhances the comfort perceived by
humans during manual guidance and allows reaching a favorable
compromise between accuracy and execution time.
Index Terms—Force control, physical human–robot interaction,
redundant robots.
I. INTRODUCTION
IN the face of the unpredictability of human behaviors, the
adoption of suitable impedance strategies [1], [2] to control
robots in the presence of humans is an essential paradigm to en-
sure reliability and safety. For advanced robots, which operate
in anthropic environments by cooperating with humans and sub-
stituting them in some tasks, the quality of performance is not
just about accuracy and repeatability. Indeed, it rather depends
on the ability of the robots to adapt their behaviors dynamically
and according to the task and human intentions. In the case of
Manuscript received December 31, 2014; revised March 8, 2015; accepted
April 30, 2015. Date of publication May 20, 2015; date of current version August
4, 2015. This paper was recommended for publication by Associate Editor V.
Kyrki and Editor A. Kheddar upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This
work was supported in part by the EC Seventh Framework Programme (FP7)
within SAPHARI project 287513 and RoDyMan project 320992.
The authors are with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica e Tec-
nologie dell’Informazione, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II,
80125 Napoli, Italy (e-mail: fanny.ficuciello@unina.it; luigi.villani@unina.it;
bruno.siciliano@unina.it).
This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TRO.2015.2430053
redundant robots, also the redundant degrees of freedom (DOFs)
may play an important role both in the stability of the coupled
system and in the quality of performance.
This paper presents an experimental study on a variable
impedance control of a redundant manipulator not specifically
designed for human–robot cooperation, used for the execution
of a task under human guidance. In particular, a cooperative
writing task is used as case study, and a Cartesian impedance
control law is adopted to achieve a compliant behavior of the
end effector with respect to the forces exerted by the human
operator.
The main idea of the paper is that of using in a synergic
way the robot’s redundancy and the modulation of the Carte-
sian impedance parameters to enhance the performance during
human–robot physical interaction. In particular, an experimen-
tal evaluation of different impedance modulation laws within a
stability region is carried out, while it is shown that the over-
all performance can be improved when the redundancy is used
to enlarge the stability region in the space of the impedance
parameters.
Considering that instability is likely to occur during inter-
action when the controller attempts to impose to the robot an
impedance behavior, which is significantly different from the
intrinsic hardware dynamics, in a recent paper [3], we have
proposed to exploit redundancy to make the robot equivalent
inertia at the end effector as close as possible to the desired iner-
tia. In particular, since comanipulation tasks typically require a
decoupled impedance along the Cartesian directions, the redun-
dant DOFs are used to reduce as much as possible the dynamic
coupling of the end effector equivalent inertia.
The preliminary results presented in [3] are extended here
through an extensive experimental study to establish the most
advantageous solution for the use of redundancy. In detail, it is
shown that robot’s redundancy, when used to ensure a decoupled
apparent inertia at the end effector, allows enlarging the stability
region in the impedance parameters space and improves the
performance.
On the other side, different modulation strategies for the
impedance parameters are proposed and tested. The parame-
ters are modulated online during the interaction according to
the human’s behavior, which is inferred through the measure-
ments of the end effector velocities. The solution adopted for
our robotic platform consists on linking the parameters varia-
tion directly to the Cartesian velocity. This approach has been
validated by means of a preliminary simulation study and tested
experimentally.
1552-3098 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
FICUCIELLO et al.: VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL OF REDUNDANT MANIPULATORS 851
The experimental results show that the variable impedance
control performs better than the impedance control with con-
stant parameters, in the sense that it preserves accuracy while
reducing the execution time, in comparison with high constant
impedance, and it guarantees a good execution speed with in-
creased accuracy, in comparison with low constant impedance.
Finally, the use of the variable impedance strategy together with
Cartesian inertia decoupling through redundancy resolution is
the combination that allows the best performance and effectively
enhances the comfort level perceived by the human operators
during manual guidance. In our knowledge, this is the first paper
where variable impedance and redundancy resolution are used
in a combined way to improve stability and performance during
human guidance.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes re-
search work related to impedance modulation strategies and
stability issues in human–robot interaction. In Section III, the
Cartesian impedance control of redundant robots is briefly sum-
marized, while the possible criteria for redundancy resolution
are presented in Section IV. Section V presents the experimental
study that has been performed to estimate the stability region
in the impedance parameter space. In Section VI, the rules for
the selection of the impedance parameters are discussed. The
experimental evaluation of the different options for redundancy
resolution as well as for the selection of the impedance modu-
lation laws is presented in Section VII. Finally, a discussion of
the results and the conclusion is drawn in Sections VIII and IX,
respectively.
II. RELATED WORKS
In recent years, the research effort on finding appropriate
impedance control strategies for human–robot physical inter-
action is going toward learning and imitation of impedance
modulation strategies of living beings.
A possible solution is represented by variable impedance ac-
tuators (VIAs) using different technologies to create a new gen-
eration of robots that can regulate their impedance behavior in
a controlled way [4].
For robot manipulators not using VIAs, a number of adap-
tive impedance/admittance strategies have been proposed for
human–robot collaborative tasks, where the control gains are
tuned on the basis of the inferred human intentions. Several
studies propose modulation strategies based on the estimation
of the human impedance computed using the forces and the
positions measured during the task execution. In [5] and [6],
the variation of the impedance parameters is determined on the
basis of the data collected from experiments where a robot and
a human execute the cooperative task. In [5], a simple switch-
ing strategy between preselected values is implemented, while
in [6], an optimal value for the damping, which minimizes a
suitable cost function, is computed online.
The estimation of the human operator’s arm impedance is not
easy, and some simplifications may occur. For example, at low
velocities, the stiffness is usually computed assuming that it is
the dominant impedance feature [7], [8]. More accurate mea-
surements methods of human impedance have been adopted by
neuroscientists to analyze human movement control [9] and,
in particular, the strategy used by the human central nervous
system to deal with instability [10]. Inspired to these studies, a
learning control technique is proposed in [11] to optimally adapt
robot’s impedance during the interaction with dynamic environ-
ments and humans. Learning techniques have been adopted also
to extract and transfer impedance modulation strategies from
humans to variable impedance robots [12] or, complementary,
to teach variable stiffness tasks to robots through physical inter-
action with a human operator [13].
A further method to transfer human skills in impedance regu-
lation to robots interacting with uncertain environments is based
on the concept of teleimpedance [14]. In this case, a suitable
human–machine interface allows us to provide the slave robot
with a position reference and an end-point stiffness reference;
this latter is estimated in real time from the measured elec-
tromyogram signals of eight muscles of the arm of the human
master.
In the applications where the robot must be free to move un-
der the forces applied by humans, the desired stiffness is usually
set to zero, as well as the desired position, while the damping
and mass parameters can be tuned, for example, depending on
the velocity and acceleration of the human operator [15]. On
the other hand, in surgical and rehabilitation scenarios, stiff-
ness regulation plays an important role to ensure accuracy and
safety in the presence of both preplanned target and interac-
tion with unpredictable dynamic environments. An interesting
method that allows us to reproduce a specific time-varying stiff-
ness profile during needle insertion by preserving passivity is
proposed in [16], while the implementation of safe constraints
along a specific task or to limit the user to stay within a safe
region is considered in [17]. These topics are also of inter-
est in the applications where collaborative robots (Cobots) are
employed [18].
For variable impedance control, a crucial issue is that stability
must be guaranteed for all the possible range of variation of the
parameters. The stability depends on how impedance control
is implemented (e.g., with or without force measurements, or
whether an impedance or an admittance law is used), but also
on the robot’s hardware; namely, the robot kinematics and dy-
namics, the kind of transmission, the presence of friction and
of structural compliance, the kind of sensors and actuators [15],
[19]. Moreover, the overall coupled dynamics of the robot and
human must be considered [20].
Stability of impedance control has been investigated in the
seminal works of Hogan [1] and later on in [21], using the
concept of passivity, and in [22], where the natural admittance
control is introduced. Admittance and impedance are defined
in a reciprocal way: Impedance control produces forces/torques
in response to velocities, while admittance control produces
velocities in response to forces and torques.
When the robot is driven by the human, a low robot impedance
is typically required. In particular, the stiffness should be low and
often null, while damping should be decreased when fast move-
ments without particular accuracy are required and increased to
perform fine motions. On the other hand, the apparent inertia of
the robot cannot be arbitrarily decreased because the stability
can be lost.
Often, the structural impedance of common robots, includ-
ing lightweight robots like the KUKA LWR4 arm considered
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
852 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 4, AUGUST 2015
in this paper, is higher than the ideal impedance required for
an effective cooperation with humans. In particular, the equiva-
lent inertia of the robot at the contact point (which hereafter is
assumed to be the end effector) may be too high and must be
reduced. This can be done by using feedback of the exchanged
force.
In this respect, using a simple 1-DOF model, it has been
theoretically proven that, by reducing the inertia more than a
given threshold below its physical value, the system loses pas-
sivity [21], due to the presence of unavoidable structural com-
pliance between the actuators and the interaction force. The
passivity property is a sufficient condition that guarantees cou-
pled stability in the presence of interaction with a generic pas-
sive environment. This threshold holds also for natural admit-
tance control [22] which, with respect to impedance control,
allows reducing the effects of friction and unmodeled distur-
bances, independently of inertia. On the other hand, theoretical
and experimental studies have shown that passivity may be too
conservative and can be relaxed to improve performance [20],
[23], [24].
III. CARTESIAN IMPEDANCE CONTROL
The KUKA LWR4 arm is a 7-DOF robot that can be torque or
velocity controlled; therefore, both impedance and admittance
control can be used. The two control approaches have comple-
mentary pros and cons, which have been well documented in
the literature (see, e.g., [25]). In this study, impedance control
is considered.
The dynamic model of the robot has the form
M(q)q̈ + C(q, q̇)q̇ + g(q) + τf = τc + JT
(q)F ext (1)
where q ∈ IRn
, with n = 7, is the vector of joint variables,
M(q) is the inertia matrix, C(q, q̇)q̇ is the vector of Cori-
olis/centrifugal torques, g(q) is the vector of gravitational
torques, τf is the vector of the friction torques, τc is the con-
trol torque, J(q) is the robot Jacobian, and τext = JT
F ext is
the joint torque resulting from external force and torque F ext
applied to the end effector.
The control strategy is designed to perform tasks in coop-
eration with humans. The operator interacts with the robot by
moving the end effector along arbitrary trajectories. It is as-
sumed that only forces can be applied. Hence, in (1), F ext is the
(3 × 1) vector of external forces and J(q) is the (3 × 7) Jaco-
bian relating the joint velocities to the end effector translational
velocity.
To design the impedance control, it is useful to derive the end
effector dynamics in the operational space [26], considering
only the translational motion
Λ(q)ẍ + μ(q, q̇)ẋ + F g (q) + F f (q) = F c + F ext (2)
where x ∈ IR3
is the Cartesian position vector of the end ef-
fector, Λ = (JM−1
JT
)−1
is the (3 × 3) end effector iner-
tia matrix, hereafter denoted as apparent inertia, while μẋ =
Λ(JM−1
C − J̇)q̇, F g = J†T
g, F f = J†T
τf and F c =
J†T
τc are the forces, reflected at the end effector, corresponding
to the noninertial joint torques in (1).
Equation (2) describes only the end effector dynamics and
does not include the so-called null space dynamics. Matrix J†
is the dynamically consistent generalized inverse of matrix J,
defined as [26]
J†
= M−1
JT
[JM−1
JT
]−1
. (3)
It can be proven that, only with this choice of generalized in-
verse, the null-space dynamics does not affect the end effector
behavior. Moreover, when the Jacobian is close to a singularity,
the generalized inverse can be robustly approximated using the
damped least squares pseudoinverse [27].
In order to make the end effector able to follow and adapt
to the force exerted by the operator at the tip, the end effector
dynamics can be set as a mass–damper system of
Λdẍ + Ddẋ = F ext (4)
where Λd and Dd are suitable inertia and damping matrices,
which are positive definite and are usually set as constant diag-
onal matrices.
The above dynamics can be imposed to the closed loop con-
trolled system by choosing F c in (2) as
F c = η(q, q̇) − Λ(q)Λ−1
d Ddẋ + (Λ(q)Λ−1
d − I)F ext (5)
with η(q, q̇) = μ(q, q̇)ẋ + F g (q) + F f (q).
This equation is a Cartesian impedance control law with null
stiffness and null virtual position. If the apparent inertia of the
end effector is left unchanged, i.e., Λd = Λ(q), the control law
(5) does not depend on the external force F ext. Conversely,
force feedback is required if inertia reshaping is desired. This is
the price to pay to achieve the ideal behavior described by (4),
which is linear, decoupled, and independent of the robot con-
figuration. On the other hand, if the natural inertia is preserved,
a configuration-dependent damping matrix should be adopted
to guarantee stability (see, e.g., [28]) leading to a nonlinear,
coupled, and configuration-dependent dynamics, which would
make more difficult for the user to lead the end effector.
The external force can be measured by using a force/torque
sensor mounted at the end effector. Alternatively, force estima-
tion techniques can be adopted. An effective method, introduced
in [29], is based on the generalized momentum p(t) = M(q)q̇
and the n-dimensional residual vector r defined as
r(t) = KI
 t
0
(τc − g(q) + r(σ))dσ − p(t)

(6)
with r(0) = 0 and KI a diagonal positive matrix. These quan-
tities can be computed using measured signals q, q̇ and the
control torque τc. It can be shown that
r ≈ τext − τδ (7)
with τδ = C(q, q̇)q̇ + τf . Hence, left multiplying both sides
of the above equation by J†T
yields
J†T
r ≈ J†T
τext − J†T
τδ ≈ F ext
where the contribution of friction torques and Coriolis and cen-
trifugal effects reflected at the end effector has been considered
negligible with respect to the external force. Therefore, vector

F ext = J†T
r (8)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
FICUCIELLO et al.: VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL OF REDUNDANT MANIPULATORS 853
is an estimate of the external force.
In view of the above approximations, the control law that
imposes the impedance dynamics (4) can be implemented in the
joint space in the form
τimp = −JT
Λ[J̇q̇ + Λ−1
d (Ddẋ − 
F ext)] + g(q) − r. (9)
IV. REDUNDANCY RESOLUTION
In the presence of redundant DOFs, which is the case con-
sidered here, it is possible to assign a secondary task in the null
space of the end effector task, by using the control law [26]
τc = τimp + (I − JT
J†T
)(u − kD q̇) (10)
where −kD q̇, with kD > 0, is a suitable damping torque, and
u is a torque control input to be designed, corresponding to a
secondary task, which is projected in the null space of the main
task through the matrix I − JT
J†T
.
As observed in [30], control law (10) is able to ensure stability
in practice both for the end effector task and in the null space. A
rigorous stability proof would require a more complex formula-
tion of the null space terms, as those presented in [31] and [32]
and generalized in [33] to the case of an arbitrary hierarchy of
null space tasks.
In our application, the human guidance of the end effector
involves only the position, which is made compliant by the
Cartesian impedance control under the action of the external
forces. Thus, there are four of the seven DOFs of the robot at
disposal for the secondary task.
Moreover, in the task considered in this paper, i.e., writing on
a planar surface, the pen should point always toward the surface.
For this reason, among the possible redundancy resolution cri-
teria, we have selected those that are less influenced by the end
effector orientation, at least in region of the workspace where the
main task is executed. This feature was also verified experimen-
tally. Another possibility would have been that of controlling
also the orientation to a desired value, or to make the end ef-
fector compliant under the action of the external torques. In this
case, however, a robot with a large number of DOFs (larger than
7) would be required to usefully exploit the redundancy.
Different criteria can be pursued in order to choose the sec-
ondary task.
One simple criterion can be that of keeping the robot as far as
possible from kinematic singularities. This can be achieved,
e.g., by maximizing the kinematic manipulability index,
defined as
m(q) =

det(JJT
) (11)
i.e., by choosing u in (10) as
u = km

∂m(q)
∂q
T
(12)
where the elements of the gradient of the manipulability index
can be computed as [34]
∂m(q)
∂qi
= m(q)trace

∂J
∂qi
J†

. (13)
Notice that the manipulability index is proportional to the area
of the velocity manipulability ellipsoid, which represents the
capability of the robot to move the end effector along the Carte-
sian directions, with a given set of unit norm joints velocities.
Hence, in a joint configuration where this index is (locally)
maximized, it is possible to produce end effector velocities in
all possible directions with (locally) minimal joint velocities.
In theory, instead of trying to make the ellipsoid as similar
as possible to a sphere, it could be useful to shape it so that
the principal axis are always suitably aligned to the significant
directions of the task. However, the continuous changes of di-
rection imposed by the human to the end effector may produce
continuous internal motions of the robot that can have undesired
effects (e.g., collisions or fast reconfigurations that are unsafe
for the human operator). Therefore, this solution, after some
tests, was discarded.
Another possibility of exploiting redundancy is that of try-
ing to optimize in some way the mapping between the forces
applied to the end effector and the corresponding velocities
or accelerations. As a matter of fact, in ideal conditions, the
Cartesian impedance control law (5) allows cancelling out the
robot dynamics as well as making the end effector dynamics
completely independent of the joint configuration. On the other
hand, it has been proven both theoretically and experimentally
that, during interaction, instability is likely to occur when the
controller attempts to impose to the robot a dynamic behavior
that differs significantly from the intrinsic hardware dynamics
(in particular, lower than the natural robot impedance). Hence,
the idea pursued here is that of using redundancy to make the
robot apparent dynamics at the end effector, described by (2),
as close as possible to the desired dynamics (4).
The most critical element in (2) is the equivalent inertia, which
is configuration dependent. This means that, at any given end
effector position, the internal motion allowed by redundancy
could be exploited to achieve robot’s configurations with de-
sired inertial properties. Of course, this can be done only within
certain limits, depending on the robot kinematic structure and
on the mass distribution. What it is reasonable, for example, is to
choose joint configurations with maximally decoupled inertia.
As in [3], this is achieved by using a secondary task function
inspired to the dynamic conditioning index (DCI) introduced in
[35] to measure the dynamic isotropy of robot manipulators in
joint space.
In the Cartesian space, the DC index (DCI) can be defined
as the least-squares difference between the generalized inertia
matrix and a diagonal matrix as
ω(q) =
1
2
ET
(q)W E(q) (14)
where W is a diagonal weighting matrix, and the error vector
E(q) is defined as
E(q) =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
λ11(q) − σ(q)
λ22(q) − σ(q)
λ33(q) − σ(q)
λ12(q)
λ13(q)
λ23(q)
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
(15)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
854 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 4, AUGUST 2015
with being λij the generic element of the inertia matrix Λ and
σ defined as
σ(q) =
1
3
trace(Λ(q)). (16)
The minimization of ω(q) results in a minimization of the el-
ements’ norm of E, which corresponds to (a local) maximally
diagonal inertia.
The weighting matrix W has been chosen in order to give
priority to the minimization of the norm of the off-diagonal
elements of Λ(q), e.g.,
W = diag{I3, μI3} (17)
with μ > 1 and I3 denoting the (3 × 3) identity matrix.
Finally, the control input u in (14) is chosen as
u = −kc

∂ω(q)
∂q
T
(18)
with kc > 0.
V. STABILITY REGION
A suitable procedure has been set up to find the allowed range
of variation of the impedance parameters of (4) so that stability
is preserved.
The stability region in the impedance parameters space could
be estimated analytically (see, e.g., [24]). However, many au-
thors have observed that the actual bounds of the stability region
are dependent on the robot’s hardware and, in the case of in-
teraction with a human operator, also on the impedance of the
human arm, which cannot be accurately modeled and evaluated
[19], [20]. A further complication here is represented by the
null-space stability for the presence of redundant DOFs [30].
Therefore, in this study, the stability region has been found
experimentally.
In the scalar case, (4) can be rewritten in the Laplace
domain as
V (s) =
1
D
1
1 + sT
F(s) (19)
where V and F are the Laplace transforms of the velocity and
force, respectively, and T = λ/D is the time constant of the
system, where λ and D represent the inertia and damping along
a generic Cartesian direction, respectively. Hence, it can be
argued that the lower the damping, the higher the steady-state
velocity for a given constant input force; moreover, for a given
damping, the lower the inertia, the higher the bandwidth of the
system or, equivalently, the lower the time constant T.
For the stability test, the joint vector
q0 = [0 0 0 −90 0 −45 0]T
corresponding to the robot configuration represented in Fig. 1,
has been selected. One reason for this choice is that, in this
configuration, the end effector inertia matrix is almost diagonal.
Another reason is that, in this configuration, one of the eigenval-
ues of the inertia matrix (that corresponding to the vertical axis)
assumes a value λ̄ close to the maximum one, in the portion of
the robot workspace where the task is executed. Hence, q0 is a
Fig. 1. Robot KUKA LWR4 in the configuration chosen for stability
evaluation.
worst-case configuration for scaling (reducing) the end effector
inertia.
Indeed, if a desired isotropic Cartesian inertia is imposed,
the dynamics along the vertical direction is the most critical for
stability, being the direction where the ratio between the desired
and actual mass is the lowest, also in a neighborhood of the joint
configuration q0. This means that the stability bounds for the
parameters along the vertical direction are the most conservative
and ensure stability also along the other directions, as well as in
the surrounding configurations.
The value of the inertia matrix in q0 and the corresponding
vector of eigenvalues are
Λ(q0) =
⎡
⎣
0.1187 0.0006 0.0226
0.0006 0.3069 −0.1395
0.0226 −0.1395 4.2405
⎤
⎦
λ(q0) = [0.1186 0.3020 4.2456 ]T
.
To reduce the number of parameters, the same damping and
the same mass has been set along all the directions of the Carte-
sian space, i.e., Dd = DI and Λd = λI, with λ = αλ̄, being
λ̄ = 4.2456 kg the maximum eigenvalue and 0 < α ≤ 1 a scal-
ing factor. This way, the desired impedance behavior will be
made isotropic by decreasing the mass along the vertical direc-
tion and increasing those along the other two Cartesian direc-
tions, which, therefore, are not critical for stability.
The stability region has been evaluated experimentally by
setting a value of damping D in the interval [5, 60] Ns/m and
reducing the value of α, starting from α = 1, until vibrations
can be felt by an operator shaking the end effector in a neighbor-
hood of the initial configuration. In order to have results inde-
pendent of the stiffness of the specific subject, the end effector
is shaken so as to produce large variations of the stiffness of the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
FICUCIELLO et al.: VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL OF REDUNDANT MANIPULATORS 855
Fig. 2. Range of minimum and maximum allowed damping D for a given
scaling factor α of the inertia matrix.
Fig. 3. Stability region: time constant T versus damping D.
human arm. The amplitude of the interval for the damping coef-
ficient has been set on the basis of experiments where the natural
robot’s inertia was not modified.
The results of the experimental procedure are reported in
Fig. 2, where the stability region for the parameters D and α
is that included between the continuous and the dotted line. It
can be observed that any value of damping in the interval [5, 60]
can be chosen provided that α > 0.25, while, for α < 0.25 the
lower and upper bounds of the allowed damping come closer.
For α < 0.1, the robot starts vibrating for any value of damping.
An alternative representation is reported in Fig. 3, where
the stability region is parameterized with respect to the time
constant T of the impedance (19) and to the damping D. In this
figure, also the geometric locus with minimum constant mass
(λ = 0.764 kg) contained in the stability region is represented.
This curve can be taken as a rough analytic expression of the
frontier of the stability region, i.e., stability is preserved for any
choice of the impedance parameters in the region on the right
of this curve.
It is worth observing that, since the end effector dynamics is
not homogenous along the three Cartesian directions, it would
be significant to choose different impedance parameters along
these directions. Therefore, a different stability region in the
parameters space could be defined for each Cartesian direction.
Actually, the three stability regions have been found experimen-
tally (see Fig. 9), using the same procedure described above, and
will be used in Section VII.
VI. VARIABLE IMPEDANCE
The goal of a variable impedance strategy for a comanipula-
tion task is to vary the damping and mass properties of the robot
in order to accommodate the human movement during physical
interaction. According to the related results available in the lit-
erature [6], [15], [19], high impedance parameters are desired
when the operator performs fine movements at low velocity,
while lower values of the parameters should be used for large
movements at high velocity. The human perception is mainly in-
fluenced by the damping parameter, while, for a given damping,
the desired (virtual) mass is crucial for stability.
Therefore, our idea is that of varying the damping according
to the absolute value of the end effector Cartesian velocity in
order to improve the performance in terms of execution time
and accuracy. Namely, when the velocity is high, the damping
force is reduced so that the operator can move the end effector
with minimum effort and the execution time can be reduced;
vice versa, at low velocity, the damping force is increased to
improve accuracy. On the other hand, the virtual mass is set so
as the parameters of the system remain in the stability region.
To this purpose, the stability region in the parameter space has
been evaluated experimentally (see Section V) for any damping
in the interval [5, 60] N · s/m.
The relationships used to vary the damping for each of the
Cartesian principal directions is
D(ẋ) = min{a e−b|ẋ|
, 5} (20)
where a = 60 and b = 4. These parameters have been chosen
in order to have a variation of the damping within the interval
[5, 60] N · s/m for the possible range of velocities in the con-
sidered task. A saturation to the minimum value of 5 N · s/m is
introduced in case of high velocity.
For the mass (or, equivalently, for the time constant T), dif-
ferent choices have been considered and tested, namely:
L1: constant mass, with low value (close to the minimum
value within the stability region), i.e. λ = 1.1 kg.
L2: constant mass, with high value, i.e. λ = 5.6 kg.
L3: constant T, set as the minimum value within the stability
region for any damping D.
L4: minimum (variable) T within the stability region for any
damping D.
In the latter case, the time constant T is computed as
T =
λf
Df
(a + b arctan(c(D − d)))
where the default damping value Df = 30 N · s/m has
been chosen as an intermediate value between the minimum
(5 N · s/m) and the maximum (60 N · s/m) values used in the
experiments. The default mass value λf = 3 kg and the constant
values a = 1.1820, b = 0.60, c = 0.4, d = 20 have been set in
order to have the minimum allowed T preserving stability.
The geometric loci in the parameters space corresponding to
the above choices are represented in Fig. 4. Notice that the dot-
dashed line (minimum T curve) can be also taken as the frontier
of the stability region in the parameter space, which, for values
of the damping D lower than 10 N · s/m, is less conservative than
the geometric locus of Fig. 3 (minimum constant mass curve).
A rigorous theoretical justification of the above choices is not
easy, but some hints can be derived by considering the posi-
tion control scheme of Fig. 5 modeling the physical interaction
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
856 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 4, AUGUST 2015
Fig. 4. Representation of the four variation laws of time constant T with
respect to damping D.
Fig. 5. Block diagram representing the human–robot physical interaction.
between the human arm and the robot’s tip along a single Carte-
sian direction. In that scheme, the human arm driving the end
effector through the force f is modeled as a pure stiffness k, con-
sidering that the stiffness is the dominant effect of the impedance
of the human arm (see, e.g., [7] and [8]), namely:
f = k(xd − x).
The value k = 200 N/m, corresponding to an intermediate value
of the arm stiffness during a writing task, has been considered
in the simulations.
In view of (4), the dynamics of the end effector, in case
of variable damping and mass, is represented by the nonlinear
equation
λ(ẋ)ẍ + D(ẋ)ẋ = f
where the damping D is defined in (20) and the mass λ is set
constant in the cases L1 and L2 or as
λ(ẋ) = D(ẋ)T
in the cases L3 and L4.
The position reference xd(t) is chosen according to a raised
cosine time law with a duration of 4 s and a total displacement
of 0.2 m.
A comparison of the performance obtained with the different
choices of the parameters can be made by comparing the forces
f applied by the human to the robot’s tip and the resulting
velocities.
In Fig. 6, the scheme with variable damping is compared
with the case of constant damping set to the minimum (D =
5 N · s/m) and maximum (D = 60 N · s/m) values, respectively.
It can be observed that the force required to move the end
effector in the case of variable damping reaches intermediate
values with respect to those required in the case of minimum
and maximum constant damping. On the other hand, when the
velocity is higher, the velocity profile in the case of variable
Fig. 6. Time history of the force (top) and velocity (bottom) in the case of
low mass (λ = 1.1 kg) and variable damping, compared with the case of low
(D = 5 N · s/m) and high (D = 60 N · s/m) constant damping.
damping is quite close to that obtained in the case of minimum
damping. For low velocity, the profile is closer to that in the case
of maximum damping.
It is worth noticing that, when constant minimum damping is
used, the velocity almost matches the desired one (not reported
in the figure); however, when the velocity decreases to zero,
both the force and the velocity are oscillating and change sign.
This undesirable behavior is emphasized when the mass is set
to the maximum value, as shown in Fig. 7, but is not present in
the other cases where, although the force is higher than in the
case of minimum damping, both force and velocity go to zero
smoothly and without oscillations.
In can be argued that, with respect to the velocity and force
profiles, the use of variable damping allows to reach a good
compromise with respect to the cases of constant low and high
damping.
On the other hand, when variable mass is used in addition
to variable damping, the simulation results show that the per-
formance do not change significantly with respect to the case
of constant mass. Slightly better results are obtained when the
virtual mass is lower, i.e., in the case L4 better than in the
case L3.
The suggestions deriving from the above analysis are based
on simplified assumptions, one for all, the hypothesis that the
stiffness of the human arm remains constant during the task
execution. For this reason, the experimental validation reported
in the next section is of crucial importance.
VII. EXPERIMENTS
In the experiments, two fundamental aspects have been con-
sidered, namely, the use of redundancy and the choice of the
variable impedance strategy.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
FICUCIELLO et al.: VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL OF REDUNDANT MANIPULATORS 857
Fig. 7. Time history of the force (top) and velocity (bottom) in the case of
high mass (λ = 5.6 kg) and variable damping, compared with the case of low
(D = 5 N · s/m) and high (D = 60 N · s/m) constant damping.
A case study has been selected, consisting in the execution of
a writing task on a horizontal plane operated by a human: the
operator guides a paint marker mounted on the robot’s tip along
a path drawn on a paper sheet.
The orientation was not considered in our case study; other-
wise, we will not have significant redundant DOFs that can be
used for the secondary task. Moreover, the aim of our work is
to check the value of the proposed approach for a generic task
of comanipulation requiring only Cartesian position control.
The path has been designed with the aim of inducing trajecto-
ries with variable velocity and is composed of long straight-line
segments, sharp corners, and smooth circular arcs (see Fig. 10,
dot-dashed lines).
The initial configuration of the robot has been chosen to facil-
itate the execution of the writing task planned on the horizontal
plane, namely
qi = [2.35 22.8 −1.54 −53.2 −3.1 101.15 0]T
with inertia matrix
Λ(qi) =
⎡
⎣
0.1265 −0.0042 0.1470
−0.0042 0.2002 −0.0661
0.1470 −0.0661 2.9396
⎤
⎦
and eigenvalues
λ(qi) = (0.1188 0.1986 2.9489 )T
where the joint angles are in degrees.
Fig. 8. Snapshot of the comanipulation task.
A. Redundancy Versus Stability
Two different secondary tasks have been tested for redun-
dancy resolution: the maximization of the kinematic manipula-
bility index (11) and the minimization of the DCI (14).
Here, the comparison is carried out by checking the stabil-
ity of the Cartesian impedance control law, i.e., verifying that
the system remains stable during task execution, when variable
impedance control is applied. A snapshot of the comanipulation
task is reported in Fig. 8; the complete video sequence can be
found in the accompany video.
In Section V, a conservative stability region in the param-
eter space has been found, assuming that the same damping
and mass parameters are set along all the Cartesian direc-
tions. A more accurate estimation of the stability region can be
found, by using the same experimental procedure described in
Section V, but allowing the choice of different values of the
parameters along the three Cartesian directions.
The stability regions for the three Cartesian directions of the
end effector, referred to the base frame, are shown in Fig. 9. In the
same figure, two sets of curves are represented, corresponding
to constant mass (or inertia) loci. The continuous curves, with
constant virtual inertia Λd = diag{0.0328, 0.0548, 0.8138} kg,
are close to the instability frontiers and can be assumed
as minimal inertia curves. The dashed curves, with Λd =
diag{0.0492, 0.0822, 1.2207} kg, are safely within the stability
regions. The experiments have been performed using a vari-
able damping impedance control law, with parameters varying
on the above curves, namely, constant inertia and damping set
according to (20).
When the DCI is used for redundancy resolution, the task
has been completed in both cases, as it is shown in Fig. 10,
where the paths of the paint marker are represented, together
with the reference path, when low and high values of virtual
inertia are used, respectively. On the other hand, in the case of
low inertia (Fig. 10, top), the task cannot be completed when the
manipulability index (Man) is used for redundancy resolution,
because the system tends to become unstable. The accuracy
of the path and the time to complete the task have not been
evaluated at this stage.
The corresponding time histories of the DCI during the ex-
ecution of the experiment are reported in Fig. 11. Notice that
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
858 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 4, AUGUST 2015
Fig. 9. Stability regions and constant mass curves for the three Cartesian
directions.
the values of the DCI are always lower when the minimization
of the DCI is used as secondary task, as expected, with some
exceptions in correspondence of abrupt changes of directions.
Moreover, in the case of low inertia, the system tends to become
unstable when the value of the DCI is too high, i.e., when the
inertia of the robot at the end effector deviates significantly from
the desired diagonal inertia imposed by the control.
B. Redundancy Versus Performance
To evaluate the performance related to redundancy resolution,
the methods have been compared using two different impedance
laws, one with constant parameters (set as λ = 1.1 kg, D =
60 N · s/m) and one with variable damping (low constant mass,
λ = 1.1 kg, of Fig. 4).
Since the objective is to compare the redundancy resolution
strategies, a generic choice for the impedance parameters is
made by setting them uniformly in all the directions. Moreover,
as described in the previous Section VII-A, when redundancy is
used to optimize the manipulability, a more conservative choice
for the impedance parameters is needed, since the stability limits
in the three Cartesian directions found experimentally in the
neighborhood of the initial configuration (see Fig. 6) are not
satisfied throughout the drawn path.
Since the assigned task consists in pursuing a given path, a
significant measure of performance is the error between the ref-
erence and the actual path, which can be defined in different
ways. A very simple measure is the absolute value of the differ-
Fig. 10. Reference and actual paths for the writing task in the case of low
(top) and high (bottom) virtual inertia.
Fig. 11. Time histories of the values of DCI in the case of low (top) and
high (bottom) virtual inertia. The continuous lines represent the DCI when
redundancy is used to increase manipulability. The dashed lines represent the
DCI when redundancy is used to minimize the DCI.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
FICUCIELLO et al.: VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL OF REDUNDANT MANIPULATORS 859
TABLE I
t-TEST RESULTS ON THE DATA OF FIG. 15
var vr hconst var vr lconst hconst vr lconst
h =1 h = 0 h = 0
time var<hconst − −
(p = 0.0062) (p = 0.8888) (p = 0.4503)
h = 0 h = 1 h = 1
length − var<lconst hconst<lconst
(p = 0.9739) (p = 0.0094) (p = 0.0313)
ence between the length of the path drawn in cooperation with
the robot, le, and the ideal path length, ld, namely the length
error
e = |ld − le|. (21)
We have also tested more accurate measures, as the area of the
region between the ideal and the actual path, or the difference
between the centroid of the reference and actual figure. For the
purpose of our experiments, however, the measure (21) provided
satisfactory results.
Another performance parameter is the execution time H of
the trajectory, defined as the difference between the time when
the entire path is completed and the time when the drawing tool
touches the paper on the desk to start writing.
In order to obtain quantities that overcome the skills of the
singular operator, the above parameters are evaluated as the
average on the performance of more subjects.
The tests have been carried out on five different subjects
that move the robot using their dominant hand. We found that
the number of subjects used in the experiments is sufficient
on the basis of the analysis of the results. Indeed, the results
of the comparison between the variable and constant (low and
high) impedance are statistically significant as shown in Table I
reported at the end of this section.
Each subject has been trained in advance, by executing the
task with the different strategies to be tested, in order to become
familiar with the task and the robot. At the end of the train-
ing phase, all the subjects were able to complete the task in a
reasonable time (under 30 s) with all the control strategies. In
addition, during the training phase, each subject was asked to
look for the configuration, which resulted the most comfortable,
as well as for the best fitting starting point of the path, without
any kind of conditioning.
The subjects were told to perform the path taking into account
the accuracy as a primary objective and the execution time as a
secondary objective. In addition, during both the training phase
and the actual testing phase, the subjects have not been informed
on the features of each control law, nor even which one of the
four strategies they were performing.
The results of the tests are reported in Fig. 12, where the
error on the length of the path e versus the execution time H is
reported for all the subjects, as well as their mean values.
It can be observed that, for the impedance control with con-
stant parameters, the use of DCI ensures better performance
than the use of manipulability index (Man) both in terms of
execution time and error on the path. This is true also for vari-
Fig. 12. Values of the length error e and execution time H in the experiments
on five subjects using variable and low constant impedance; both manipulability
index and DCI optimization are used as secondary tasks. The bigger markers
are the mean values on the five different subjects.
Fig. 13. Values of length error e and execution time H in the experiments on
three subjects using DCI optimization and the four variable impedance laws of
Fig. 4. The bigger markers are the mean values on the three different subjects.
able impedance control even though the use of variable param-
eters reduces the error on the path in spite of the strategy used
to solve the redundancy.
Last but not least, all the subjects involved in the experiments
have confirmed that the “feeling” of the manual guidance (in
terms of intuitiveness and response of the robot) improves when
the DCI is adopted, i.e., when redundancy is used to decouple
the natural end effector dynamics along the principal directions
of the task.
C. Evaluation of Variable Impedance Laws
In this set of experiments, the DCI is adopted for redun-
dancy resolution, and the performance of the different variable
impedance laws, presented in Section VI, is evaluated. The same
task described in the previous sections has been executed by
three different subjects.
The results, reported in Fig. 13, show that the lower error
along the path with the smaller execution time is achieved when
the virtual mass of the end effector is kept constant, to the
minimum value compatible with stability, namely, the law L1
(see also Fig. 4).
D. Variable Versus Constant Impedance
The variable impedance control L1 has been compared with
two different sets of constant impedance gains (chosen along
the curve), namely: high damping (λ = 1.1 kg, D = 60 N · s/m)
and low damping (λ = 1.1 kg, D = 20 N · s/m). These values
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
860 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 4, AUGUST 2015
Fig. 14. Time history of the variable damping D during the execution of the
task with the variable impedance control L1 for one subject.
Fig. 15. Values of length error e and execution time H in the experiments on
five subjects using DCI optimization, with the variable impedance control L1
and two different sets of constant parameters. The bigger markers are the mean
values on the five different subjects.
correspond to the average maximum and minimum damping
recorded in the previous set of experiments with constant mass
and variable damping.
The time history of the damping variation along the three
Cartesian directions for a single test is reported in Fig. 14. The
aim of this test is that of evaluating what is resulted as the best
variable impedance control law for the considered task, with two
different choices of constant damping values: high damping (to
privilege accuracy) and low damping (to privilege execution
speed).
The results, carried out on five different subjects, are shown
in Fig. 15, where the execution time H and the error on the
length of the path are reported. In order to assess whether the
difference between the mean values on the set of data reported
in Fig. 15 is statistically significant, a t-test has been performed
[36]. The results, reported in Table I, can be interpreted as fol-
lows. If the variable h is 1 (0), then the two compared means
are (not) significantly different with confidence p ∈ [0, 1]; the
lower the value of p, the more statistically significant the differ-
ence between the mean values of the two sets of data. Moreover,
Fig. 16 represents the norm of the linear forces exerted at the tip,
for one subject, in the case of high, low and variable impedance.
The horizontal dashed lines are the corresponding mean values
computed during the execution of the task.
Looking at Table I, the constant impedance with high damping
(hconst) ensures higher accuracy with respect to the constant
impedance with low damping (lconst), as expected. This result,
however, comes at the expenses of the execution time and of
Fig. 16. Norm and mean value of the contact forces for high, variable, and
low damping, for one subject.
the operator effort requested for the manual guidance. Indeed,
from Fig. 16, it can be verified that higher damping requires
higher forces to be exerted to the end effector. On the contrary,
impedance with low damping allows the task to be performed
more easily, with less effort and time, but with less accuracy.
The most relevant result of Table I is that the variable
impedance (var) guarantees the best performance for accuracy,
execution time, and effort of the operator (see also Figs. 15
and 16). Indeed, it can be seen that the improvement of vari-
able impedance (var) with respect to high constant damping
(hconst) in terms of execution time is statistically significant;
on the contrary, it is not possible to detect an edge over the accu-
racy. From the comparison between the low constant damping
(lconst) and variable impedance parameters (var), it emerges
that the advantage of the variable strategy is relevant and statis-
tically significant in terms of accuracy, while the difference in
terms of execution time is irrelevant.
For the sake of completeness, the results of the comparison
between high and low constant damping parameters have also
been reported. By observing Fig. 15 and Table I, the advantage of
using high damping parameters for accuracy appears clear and
statistically significant. The execution time improves when low
damping is adopted since the robot become lighter and easier
to move (see Fig. 16). However, the result on the execution
time is not statistically significant: This is probably because the
subjects were instructed to prefer accuracy over speed during
the execution of the task, which has led to a higher dispersion
of the data related to execution time.
VIII. DISCUSSION
During physical human–robot interaction, the most natural
way to control the robot is through an impedance strategy tuned
to the task requirements. Redundancy can be exploited as well
to improve stability and performance. The research presented
in this study branches off along these two complementary lines,
both pointing toward the improvement of the physical human–
robot interaction in terms of intuitiveness and stability during
the execution of comanipulation tasks.
In the first instance, different strategies to solve redundancy
are evaluated among the solutions that are compatible with the
main task. The comparison has been made in terms of stability
and performance (i.e., length error e and execution time H). The
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
FICUCIELLO et al.: VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL OF REDUNDANT MANIPULATORS 861
Fig. 17. Conceptual path followed for the experimental investigations. The
solutions with the best results in terms of performance (i.e., length error e and
execution time H) and stability are highlighted using different colours.
Fig. 18. Results obtained with different combination of redundancy resolution
and impedance strategies presented on the basis of the performance level in
increasing order from left to right.
experiments showed that the best way to solve redundancy in
comanipulation tasks is that of keeping the end effector apparent
inertia as close as possible to that imposed by the impedance
control, i.e., at least diagonal. This allows a wider range of
selection of the impedance parameters that preserve stability
and improves the performance (see Sections VII-A and VII-B).
In parallel, the experimental evaluation of different modula-
tion strategies of the impedance parameters has been carried out.
The best solution for a lightweight robot consists on linking the
damping variation directly to the Cartesian velocity, as previ-
ously discussed. The performance is improved when the virtual
equivalent mass at the end effector is kept as low as possible,
compatibly with the stability (see Fig. 13).
In Fig. 17, a graphical representation of the conceptual path
followed in our investigation is reported. It can be seen that
the best solution in terms of stability and performance is that
achieved using variable damping and constant virtual mass, set
to the minimum value compatible with the stability. The compar-
ison between variable and constant impedance using different
redundancy resolution strategies is summarized in Fig. 18. It
can be seen that the performance improves from left to right.
A number of issues remain open. First of all, we have adopted
a damping variation law (20) that is the result of an extensive
experimental campaign. In the experiments, we have also tested
the adaptation law presented in [15], where the damping is var-
ied according to the acceleration, with worse results, because
the system was too responsive. The modulation of the damp-
ing based on acceleration can be interpreted as a nonlinear lead
compensation based on the intention of the user to increase or de-
crease the velocity, which enhances the reactivity of the system,
resulting in a higher equivalent bandwidth. This may explain
why this kind of modulation is effective on the robotic platform
used in [15], based on a heavy industrial robot with moving
masses ranging from 100 to 500 kg and low equivalent band-
width, and not helpful in our platform, based on a lightweight
KUKA robot with a larger equivalent bandwidth, where it causes
an overreaction. In any case, a theoretical analysis supporting
the choice of the modulation laws of the impedance parameters,
which takes into account the nonlinear and coupled dynamics
of robot and human arm, is still missing.
Another important issue is that our study does not include a
rigorous stability proof, for both fixed and variable impedance
parameters. As a matter of fact, although the experimental re-
sults provide significant and useful guidelines, these cannot be
easily generalized to any kind of robot and task.
IX. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the problem of Cartesian impedance control of a
redundant robot arm executing a cooperative task with a human
has been addressed. In particular, redundancy has been used to
keep robot’s natural behavior as close as possible to the desired
impedance behavior, by decoupling the end effector equivalent
inertia. This allows easily finding a region in the impedance
parameter space where stability is preserved. Extensive exper-
imental tests confirmed that this solution leads to improving
performance in the execution of a cooperative writing task with
respect to the use of other options for redundancy resolution,
e.g., the maximization of the manipulability index.
Moreover, different variable impedance strategies, where the
parameters are modified on the basis of the interpretation of
human intentions, have been evaluated in a simulation study
and tested on the experimental setup. The variable impedance
strategy ensuring the best performance has been selected and
compared with two different sets of constant impedance gains,
i.e., high damping (to privilege accuracy) and low damping (to
privilege execution speed).
The experimental results show that the combination of vari-
able impedance and redundancy resolution with inertia decou-
pling ensures the best tradeoff between accuracy and execution
time.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Hogan, “Impedance control: An approach to manipulation: Part I the-
ory; Part II implementation; Part III applications,” J. Dyn. Sys., Meas.,
Control, vol. 107, no. 12, pp. 1–24, 1985.
[2] H. Sadeghian, L. Villani, M. Keshmiri, and B. Siciliano, “Task-space
control of robot manipulators with null-space compliance,” IEEE Trans.
Robot., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 493–506, Apr. 2014.
[3] F. Ficuciello, A. Romano, L. Villani, and B. Siciliano, “Cartesian
impedance control of redundant manipulators for human-robot co-
manipulation,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Chicago,
IL, USA, 2014, pp. 2120–2125.
[4] B. Vanderborght, A. Albu-Schaeffer, A. Bicchi, E. Burdet, D. Caldwell,
R. Carloni, M. Catalano, O. Eiberger, W. Friedl, G. Ganesh, M. Gara-
bini, M. Grebenstein, G. Grioli, S. Haddadin, H. Hoppner, A. Jafari, M.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
862 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 4, AUGUST 2015
Laffranchi, D. Lefeber, F. Petit, S. Stramigioli, N. Tsagarakis, M. V.
Damme, R. V. Ham, L. Visser, and S. Wolf, “Variable impedance ac-
tuators: A review,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 1601–1614,
2013.
[5] R. Ikeura and H. Inooka, “Variable impedance control of a robot for coop-
eration with a human,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Nagoya,
Aichi, Japan, 1995, pp. 3097–3102.
[6] R. Ikeura, T. Moriguchi, and K. Mizutani, “Optimal variable impedance
control for a robot and its application to lifting an object with a human,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Human Interactive Commun., Berlin,
Germany, 2002, pp. 500–505.
[7] T. Tsumugiwa, R. Yokogawa, and K. Hara, “Variable impedance control
based on estimation of human arm stiffness for human-robot cooperative
calligraphic task,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Washington,
DC, USA, 2002, pp. 644–650.
[8] C. Mitsantisuk, K. Ohishi, and S. Katsura, “Variable mechanical stiffness
control based on human stiffness estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Mechatronics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2011, pp. 731–736.
[9] K. P. Tee, D. W. Franklin, M. Kawato, T. T. Milner, and E. Burdet,
“Concurrent adaptation of force and impedance in the redundant muscle
system,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 102, no. 1, pp. 31–44, 2010.
[10] E. Burdet, R. Osu, D. Franklin, T. E. Milner, and M. Kawato,
“The central nervous system stabilizes unstable dynamics by learn-
ing optimal impedance,” Nature, vol. 414, no. 6862, pp. 446–449,
2001.
[11] C. Yang, G. Ganesh, S. Haddadin, S. Parusel, A. Albu-Schaeffer, and
E. Burdet, “Human-like adaptation of force and impedance in stable and
unstable interactions,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 918–930,
Apr. 2011.
[12] M. Howard, D. Braun, and S. Vijayakumar, “Transferring hu-
man impedance behavior to heterogeneous variable impedance ac-
tuators,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 847–862, Aug.
2013.
[13] K. Kronander and A. Billard, “Online learning of varying stiffness through
physical human-robot interaction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
St. Paul, MN, USA, 2012, pp. 1842–1849.
[14] A. Ajoudani, N. Tsagarakis, and A. Bicchi, “Tele-impedance: Teleoper-
ation with impedance regulation using a body-machine interface,” Int. J.
Robot. Res., vol. 31, no. 13, pp. 1642–1656, 2012.
[15] A. Lecours, B. Mayer-St-Onge, and C. Gosselin, “Variable admittance
control of a four-degree-of-freedom intelligent assist device,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Saint Paul, MN, USA, 2012, pp. 3903–
3908.
[16] F. Ferraguti, C. Secchi, and C. Fantuzzi, “A tank-based approach to
impedance control with variable stiffness,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., Karlsruhe, Germany, 2014, pp. 4933–4938.
[17] S. Bowyer, B. Davies, and F. R. y Baena, “Active constraints/virtual
fixtures: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 138–157, Feb.
2014.
[18] C. A. Moore, M. A. Peshkin, and J. E. Colgate, “Cobot implementation
of virtual paths and 3-d virtual surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 19,
no. 2, pp. 347–351, Apr. 2003.
[19] V. Duchaine, B. Mayer-St-Onge, D. Gao, and C. Gosselin, “Stable and
intuitive control of an intelligent assist device,” IEEE Trans. Haptics, vol.
5, no. 2, pp. 1939–1412, Apr–Jun. 2012.
[20] S. Buerger and N. Hogan, “Complementary stability and loop shaping for
improved human-robot interaction,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 23, no. 2,
pp. 232–244, Apr. 2007.
[21] J. Colgate and H. Hogan, “Robust control of dynamically interacting
systems,” Int. J. Control, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 65–88, 1988.
[22] W. Newman, “Stability and performance limits of interaction controllers,”
ASME J. Dyn. Syst., Meas. Control, vol. 114, no. 4, pp. 563–570,
1992.
[23] S. Buerger and N. Hogan, “Relaxing passivity for human-robot interac-
tion,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelli. Robots Syst., Beijing, China,
2006, pp. 4570–4575.
[24] V. Duchaine and C. Gosselin, “Investigation of human-robot interaction
stability using Lyapunov theory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
Pasadena, CA, USA, 2008, pp. 2189–2194.
[25] C. Ott, R. Mukherjee, and Y. Nakamura, “Unified impedance and admit-
tance control,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Anchorage, AK,
USA, 2010, pp. 554–561.
[26] O. Khatib, “A unified approach for motion and force control of robot
manipulators: The operational space formulation,” IEEE J. Robot. Autom.,
vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1115–1120, Feb. 1987.
[27] Y. Nakamura and H. Hanafusa, “Inverse kinematic solution with singular-
ity robustness for robot manipulator control,” ASME J. Dyn. Syst., Meas.
Control, vol. 108, pp. 163–171, 1986.
[28] C. Ott, Cartesian Impedance Control of Redundant and Flexible Joint
Robots (Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics), vol. 49. New York, NY,
USA: Springer, 2008.
[29] A. D. Luca, A. Albu-Schäffer, S. Haddadin, and G. Hirzinger, “Colli-
sion detection and safe reaction with the DLR-III lightweight robot arm,”
in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Beijing, China, 2006,
pp. 1623–1630.
[30] J. Nakanishi, R. Cory, M. J. Peters, and S. Schaal, “Operational space
control: A theoretical and empirical comparison,” Int. J. Robot. Res.,
vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 737–757, 2008.
[31] C. Natale, B. Siciliano, and L. Villani, “Spatial impedance control of
redundant manipulators,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Detroit,
MI, USA, 1999, pp. 1788–1793.
[32] H. Sadeghian, L. Villani, M. Keshmiri, and B. Siciliano, “Dynamic multi-
priority control in redundant robotic systems,” Robotica, vol. 31, no. 7,
pp. 1155–1167, 2013.
[33] C. Dietrich, C. Ott, and A. Albu-Schäffer, “Multi-objective compliance
control of redundant manipulators: Hierarchy, control, and stability,”
in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Tokyo, Japan, 2013,
pp. 3043–3050.
[34] J. Park, W. Chung, and Y. Youm, “Computation of gradient of manipu-
lability for kinematically redundant manipulators including dual manipu-
lators system,” Trans. Control Autom. Syst. Eng., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 8–15,
1999.
[35] O. Ma and J. Angeles, “The concept of dynamic isotropy and its appli-
cations to inverse kinematics and trajectory planning,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom., San Francisco, CA, USA, 1990, pp. 10–15.
[36] M. Hazewinkel, Ed.,Encyclopedia of Mathematics. New York, USA:
Springer-Verlag, 2001.
Fanny Ficuciello (M’11) was born in Nocera Infe-
riore, Italy, on October 20, 1974. She received the
Laurea degree (magna cum laude) in mechanical
engineering in 2007 and the Ph.D. degree in com-
puter and automation engineering from University of
Naples Federico II, Napoli, Italy, in November 2010.
From September to March 2010 she was a Vis-
iting Scholar with the Control Engineering Group,
University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands,
under the supervision of Prof. S. Stramigioli. She is
a Member of PRISMA (Projects of Industrial and
Service Robotics, Mechatronics and Automation) Research Group. She is cur-
rently a Postdoctoral Researcher with University of Naples Fedeerico II. Her
research interest is focused on robotics, in particular on safe physical human–
robot interaction, force/impedance control, grasping, and manipulation control
of anthropomorphic hand-arm systems. She has published more than 20 journal
and conference papers and book chapters.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
FICUCIELLO et al.: VARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL OF REDUNDANT MANIPULATORS 863
Luigi Villani (S’94–M’97–SM’03) was born in Avel-
lino, Italy, on December 5, 1966. He received the
Laurea degree in electronic engineering and the Re-
search Doctorate degree in electronic engineering and
computer science from University of Naples, Naples,
Italy, in 1992 and 1996, respectively.
He is an Associate Professor of automatic control
with the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Information Technology, University of Naples. He
has coauthored six books and more than 50 journal
papers and 100 conference papers and book chapters.
His book Robotics: Modelling, Planning and Control is one of the most widely
adopted textbooks worldwide. His research interests include force/motion con-
trol of manipulators, safe physical human–robot interaction, cooperative robot
manipulation, lightweight flexible arms, adaptive and nonlinear control of me-
chanical systems, visual servoing, fault diagnosis, and fault tolerance for dy-
namical systems.
Dr. Villani was an Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS
from 2007 to 2011 and Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONTROL
SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY from 2005 to 2012.
Bruno Siciliano (M’91–SM’94–F’00) was born in
Naples, Italy, on October 27, 1959. He received the
Laurea degree and the Research Doctorate degree
in electronic engineering from University of Naples,
Naples, in 1982 and 1987, respectively.
He is currently a Professor of control and robotics
and the Director of the PRISMA (Projects of Indus-
trial and Service Robotics, Mechatronics and Au-
tomation) Laboratory, Department of Electrical En-
gineering and Information Technology, University of
Naples. He has coauthored seven books, 80 journal
papers, and 230 international conference papers and book chapters. His book
Robotics: Modelling, Planning and Control is one of the most widely adopted
textbooks worldwide. He has delivered 140 invited lectures and seminars at
institutions worldwide. His research interests include identification and adap-
tive control, impedance and force control, visual tracking and servoing, redun-
dant and cooperative manipulators, lightweight flexible arms, aerial robots, and
human-centered and service robotics.
Dr. Siciliano is a Fellow of the American Society of Mechanical Engi-
neers and the International Federation of Automatic Control. He is Co-Editor
of Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics series, and has served on the Editorial
Boards of several journals as well as Chair or Co-Chair for numerous inter-
national conferences. He co-edited the Springer Handbook of Robotics, which
received the AAP PROSE Award for Excellence in Physical Sciences and Math-
ematics and was also the winner in the category Engineering and Technology.
His group has been granted 14 European projects, including an Advanced Grant
from the European Research Council. He has served the IEEE Robotics and
Automation Society as President, as Vice President for Technical Activities and
Vice President for Publications, as a member of the AdCom, and as a Distin-
guished Lecturer. He has received several awards, including the 2015 IEEE RAS
George Saridis Leadership Award in Robotics and Automation.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:03:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
