=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
                                      IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 23, NO. 3, JUNE 2018                              1193

   A DMPs-Based Framework for Robot Learning
     and Generalization of Humanlike Variable
               Impedance Skills

           Chenguang Yang    , Senior Member, IEEE, Chao Zeng    , Cheng Fang    , Member, IEEE,
                  Wei He    , Senior Member, IEEE, and Zhijun Li    , Senior Member, IEEE



        Abstract—One promising approach for robots efﬁciently                                     I. INTRODUCTION
       learning skills is to learn manipulation skills from human
       tutors by demonstration and then generalize these learned    T IS increasingly expected that robots are capable of ﬂexible
        skills to complete new tasks. Traditional learning and       skills in order to adapt to more complex situations in phys-                         I       generalization methods, however, have not well considered   ical human–robot interaction systems. Teaching by demonstra-
     human impedance features, which makes the skills less   tion (TbD) [1], [2] is considered as one of the most effective
      humanlike and restricted in physical human–robot interac-
                                                          ways for robots to learn motion and manipulation skills from       tion scenarios. In particular, stiffness generalization has
      not been well considered. This paper develops a framework  humans. Conventional TbD methods, e.g., joysticks, keyboard,
       that enables the robot to learn both movement and stiffness   or human motion capture devices, have been more focused on
       features from the human tutor. To this end, the upper limb   fast programming for endpoint movement trajectory planning
      muscle activities of the human tutor are monitored to extract  and control. Such interfaces may be efﬁcient for simple tasks
       variable stiffness in real time, and the estimated human
                                                                              that depend only on position. However, they are hardly appli-     arm endpoint stiffness is properly mapped into the robot
      impedance controller. Then, a dynamic movement primi-   cable for complicated interactions, especially when regarding
       tives model is extended and employed to simultaneously   scenarios where robots physically interact with the environment
      encode the movement trajectories and the stiffness proﬁles.   including humans and where stiffness proﬁles in addition to
        In this way, both position trajectory and stiffness proﬁle are   position trajectories need to be properly regulated [3]–[6].
      considered for robot motion control in this paper to realize
                                                                   Neuroscience studies have demonstrated how humans per-      a more complete skill transfer process. More importantly,
       stiffness generalization and movement generalization can  form speciﬁc tasks by adapting limb muscle stiffness [7]. By
      be efﬁciently realized by the proposed framework. Exper-   using synthesized visual and haptic feedback, a human demon-
       imental tests have been performed on a dual-arm Baxter   strator is able to adjust his limb impedance to reduce the exter-
       robot to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method.     nal interference under the control of the central nervous system.
         Index Terms—Dynamic movement primitives (DMPs),   Variable impedance regulation widely exists in human task-
      human–robot interaction, stiffness generalization, variable   performing cases. When performing a particular task, a human
      impedance skill transfer.
                                                                   demonstrator could increase his limb force in a natural manner
                                                      when the resistance force becomes larger, and vice versa. The          Manuscript received October 22, 2017; revised January 28, 2018; ac-
        cepted March 13, 2018. Date of publication March 20, 2018; date of  impedance adaptive process plays a great role in such kinds of
        current version June 12, 2018. Recommended by Technical Editor H. A.   tasks. Similarly, adaptive impedance control is also necessary
         Varol. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
                                                                            for robotic systems [8]–[10]. In our previous work [11]–[13],        Foundation of China under Grants 61473120, 61625303, 61751310, in
         part by the Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangzhou un-  we have applied variable impedance skill transfer to robot skill
        der Grant 201607010006, in part by the State Key Laboratory of Robotics   learning scenarios. However, the work just focused on imitation
       and System (HIT) under Grant SKLRS-2017-KF-13, and in part by the
                                                                           learning, which refers to the process that the robot is only able       Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant
       2017ZD057. (Corresponding author: Chenguang Yang.)                 to replay the learned motion skills exactly following what the
          C. Yang and C. Zeng are with the Key Laboratory of Autonomous  human tutor has demonstrated. This paper further investigates
       Systems and Networked Control, College of Automation Science and
                                                                        the possibility for a robot to generalize the learned skills to new        Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640,
       China (e-mail: cyang@ieee.org; mjzengchao@163.com).                situations using a variable stiffness strategy.
          C. Fang is with the Humanoids and Human Centered Mechatronics     Transferring human limb stiffness, which can be adjusted
        Lab, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova 16163, Italy (e-mail: cheng.
                                                                       online in a real-time manner to a robot, is an effective way to          fang@iit.it).
        W. He is with the School of Automation and Electrical Engineering,   realize variable impedance skill transfer [11], [14]–[16]. The
         University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China   electromyographic (EMG) signals extracted from human limbs
         (e-mail: weihe@ieee.org).
                                                                      contain rich information of muscle activities, based on which           Z. Li is with Department of Automation, University of Science and
       Technology of China, Hefei, 230026, China (email: zjli@ieee.org).        variation of human limb impedance can be effectively monitored
          Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available  and estimated during a task execution. Compared with the other
        online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
                                                             methods [4], [6], [17], which take nonbiological ways to achieve            Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TMECH.2018.2817589


                      1083-4435 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
                        See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
         1194                                                          IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 23, NO. 3, JUNE 2018





          Fig. 1.  Procedure of the developed TbD system for skills learning and generalization.



         variable gains, the EMG-based method could allow the transfer   the motion of the master arm through the attached virtual spring
        of human impedance features to the robot. Therefore, the robot   (see [13]). Finally, experimental studies are conducted to ver-
       can adapt to complex tasks and environments in a more direct   ify the approach on a Baxter robot. The whole framework is
      way [13].                                                     depicted in Fig. 1.
           In order to generalize skills obtained by imitation learning,    The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as
       movement trajectories need to be encoded such that they can   follows: 1) This paper presents a scheme combining EMG-based
       be easily adapted to new situations. Dynamic movement prim-   variable impedance skill transfer with DMP-based motion se-
          itives (DMPs) are one of the most commonly used methods   quence planning, inheriting the merits of these two aspects for
         to represent movements of humans and robots [18], [19]. The   robotic skill acquisition; and 2) more importantly, the devel-
     DMPs model is represented by a set of differential equations that  oped framework can simultaneously encode both trajectories
       can encode high-dimensional control policies. Thus far, several  and stiffness proﬁles in a uniﬁed manner, which allows both
        types of DMPs models have been developed and successfully   trajectory generalization and stiffness schedule.
         utilized to learn a large number of skills such as ball-in-a-cup    The rest of this paper is structured as follows. The methodol-
         [20], drumming [20], and serving water [21]. However, these  ogy is ﬁrst presented in Section II. The experimental evaluation
        papers have only utilized the DMPs model to encode movement    is then presented in Section III. Finally, conclusion is given in
          trajectories.                                                   Section IV.
           Recently, stiffness/force adaptation has been investigated
        based on this model. In [22], a DMPs method has been pre-                                   II. METHODOLOGY
        sented for variable stiffness scheduling, in which the gains are
                                                                          In this part, the EMG-based variable stiffness estimation
        represented using a function approximator. In [23], a DMPs
                                                            method is introduced in Section II-A. Then, the teleoperation
       model is developed for the execution of bimanual or tightly cou-
                                                                          control strategy is developed for dual-arm imitation movement
        pled cooperative tasks by coupling force/torque feedback into
                                                                             in Section II-B. In Section II-C, the DMPs framework for skill
        the transform system. Steinmetz et al. [5] proposed a method to
                                                                          representation is ﬁnally presented.
        simultaneously transfer positional and force requirements for in-
        contact tasks. In [24], stiffness adaptation has been introduced
                                                               A. EMG-Based Variable Stiffness Estimation
         to assist human tutor to increase the intuitiveness of interac-
         tion during teaching. Nemec et al. [25] proposed a method that     This modality is developed to enable the robot to learn a
        enables stiffness adaptation in path operational space, consid-   proper stiffness regulation strategy from the human tutor dur-
        ering the variance of motion across multiple executions and   ing demonstrations. To do so, the human tutor’s limb endpoint
        the current speed. These papers have veriﬁed the signiﬁcance of   stiffness is estimated ﬁrst. The EMG signals extracted from the
         stiffness/force adaptation for robot interactions with the environ-   tutor’s arm are used to monitor the muscle activation for the
       ment including humans. However, it has not been investigated   stiffness estimation. Subsequently, the estimated human end-
         to model and learn the stiffness proﬁles in “muscle” space.       point stiffness proﬁle is transferred to the robot as the gains in
          This paper proposes a framework that enables robots to ef-   the joint impedance controller.
        ﬁciently learn both motor and stiffness control policies from    The conservative congruence transformation between the
       humans. To that end, human limb muscle activities are mon-   Cartesian stiffness and the stiffnesses of human arm is deﬁned
         itored for variable stiffness estimation. The DMPs framework   as follows [26]:
          is extended to generalize movement trajectories and stiffness
                                                                                                           h  (q)Fex        proﬁles. Additionally, a dual-arm control strategy with haptic       Ken = J+Th  (qh)[Kj −∂J+T      ∂qh]J+h (qh)     (1)                                                                                           ∂qh        feedback mechanism is developed for skill transfer. During the
        demonstration, the master arm of the robot is physically con-  where Ken ∈R6×6 and Kj ∈R7×7 are the human arm endpoint
        nected with the human tutor’s hand and the slave arm follows   stiffness and joint stiffness, respectively. J+Th  ∈R6×7 denotes


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
      YANG et al.: DMPS-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR ROBOT LEARNING AND GENERALIZATION OF HUMANLIKE VARIABLE IMPEDANCE SKILLS            1195





         Fig. 2.   Position of the eight-channel MYO for stiffness estimation.



                                                                                        Fig. 3.  Example of EMG enveloping by using a low-pass ﬁlter and
       the pseudoinverse of the human arm Jacobian matrix, which   moving average method. The blue line represents the raw EMG signals.
       represents the arm posture, and qh ∈R7 represents the arm   The red line is the ﬁltered stiffness coefﬁcient representing limb muscle                                                                                                   activities.
        joint angles. Fex ∈R6 is the external force that is applied at the
      human arm endpoint.
         Generally speaking, the joint stiffness of human arm Kj is                                                                    equation [13]:
        related to the muscle cocontraction activity, the posture of hu-
     man arm, the muscle stretch reﬂex, etc. In this paper, a veriﬁed                      N
                                                                            p =     |fi(At)|.                     (4)        effective and simpliﬁed estimation model of human arm joint
        stiffness is employed [27], [28], where joint stiffness Kj is rep-                             i=1
       resented as multiplication of a muscle cocontraction indicator   Therefore, there are three parameters, i.e., the constant coefﬁ-
      α(p) and an intrinsic constant stiffness Kj, which can be identi-   cients λ1, λ2, and the intrinsically constant joint stiffness matrix
      ﬁed at the condition of minimal muscle cocontractions, namely  Kj, that have to be estimated. These parameters can be estimated
     Kj = α(p)Kj. The coefﬁcient α(p) can be obtained by        by minimizing the Frobenius norm of the following expression
                                                            which is derived from (1):
                                 λ1(1 −e−λ2p)
                                                                      (2)                     α(p) = 1 +                                                                                              h  (q)Fex                                                               ∥α(p)Kj −∂J+T                                   (1 + e−λ2p)                                                              −JTh (qh)KenJh(qh)∥     (5)
                                                                                 ∂qh
      where λ1 and λ2 are positive constant coefﬁcients to be esti-  where the human arm Cartesian stiffness Ken ∈R6×6 can be
       mated, and p is an indicator used to represent muscle activation   identiﬁed in an indirect way [27].
        level. The indicator p can be obtained in a two-step way: a low-    The human arm Jacobian Jh is responsible for considering
       pass ﬁlter (ﬁnite impulse response ﬁlter with a cutoff frequency   the geometrical change of the endpoint stiffness proﬁle. To cal-
       of 100 Hz) and a moving average technique are ﬁrst used to   culate Jh, a human arm kinematic model, i.e., the D–H model, is
        extract an envelope of the raw EMG signals from each of N   utilized to represent the simpliﬁed human arm kinematics (see
       channels using an EMG extraction device MYO. There are total   [29] for details). It represents the human arm as a model with
     N = 8 channels of the EMG signals used in this paper. MYO  7 degrees of freedom (DoFs) : 3 DoFs on the shoulder, 2 DoFs
         is worn on the upper arm to collect raw EMG data from the  on the elbow, and 2 DoFs on the wrist. The calculation of the
       muscles, as shown in Fig. 2. An example of EMG envelope is  human arm joint angles is realized by measuring the quater-
      shown in Fig. 3.                                              nions obtained from two inertial measurement units, and then
        The moving average process takes the following equation:     converting them to the joint angles according to [12].

                      W −1                             B. Dual-Arm Control Strategy for Demonstration                           1
                  f(At) =       EMG(At−k)              (3)
              W                               k=0                    A teleoperation-based kinesthetic teaching strategy is utilized
                                                                            for the realization of human-to-robot skills transfer in a teaching
      where f(At) represents the amplitude of the envelope, W repre-   phase based on a dual-arm robot platform. A dual-arm control
        sents the window size, which is set at 40 samples (at a sampling   strategy is accordingly designed to achieve this goal. One of the
        rate of 100 Hz). EMG(Ak) indicates the amplitude of the raw  two arms is used as the master arm and the other as the slave
    EMG signal, which is detected from one channel. k and t are the   arm, and the master arm is connected to the human tutor’s hand
       sampling point and time, respectively. Then, the indicator p can  by using a mechanical coupling interface. The human tutor takes
      be calculated by summing the absolute values of the amplitudes   the master arm to move and the robot slave arm synchronously
       of the envelope of the EMG signals, as shown in the following   follows the motion to execute a speciﬁc task. Compared to the


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
         1196                                                          IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 23, NO. 3, JUNE 2018


         traditional way of demonstration, in which the human tutor    The nonlinear function f(s) is deﬁned by
      may hold and drive the slave arm directly, this indirect way of
                                                                          N
        demonstration (teleoperation) can make the human tutor adapt
                                                                                   f(s) =    γiφi(s)s                   (9)
         his muscle activity and the corresponding Cartesian stiffness
                                                                                                    i=1
       more naturally. This process can be considered as imitation
         learning.                                                   with
      A haptic feedback mechanism integrated into the dual-arm                        exp(−hi(s −ci)2)
        control is provided to the human tutor, which contributes to               φi(s) =   N                               (10)
                                                                                          j=1 exp(−hj(s −cj)2)        stimulating the human tutor’s muscle activation for the stability
       improvement of the task execution. A virtual spring-damping                                                             where φi(s) is considered as a normalized radial basis function
       system is attached between the robot two arms. The human                                                                   with the center ci and the width hi. Each basis function hi is
         tutor’s hand is connected to the robot master arm using a me-                                                                 weighted by γi. N denotes the number of the Gaussian functions
        chanical interface [13]. The slave arm follows the motion of                                                                                that need to be used in the model. The parameters ci, hi, and N
        the master arm in both Cartesian space and joint space under                                                                         are determined in accordance to the situation of a task.
        the designed control mode. Due to the movement tracking error                                           A supervised learning process is needed for parameter esti-
       between the two arms, a virtual resistance force is generated                                                                     mation. Given a single demonstration, we obtain the target force
        as haptic feedback and provided to the human tutor. Thus, the    ftarget(s) as follows:
         tutor is able to “feel” the motion error in a real-time manner and
       can regulate his muscle strength to compensate for the error. We                           τ ˙v + d ˙x −k(g −x)
                                                                                                          ftarget(s) =                                .          (11)
        leave the detail of the dual-arm control strategy to [13].                                     g −x0

                                                                   Then, the weights γ of DMPs model are calculated using
       C. Dynamical Movement Primitives for Skill
                                                                             locally weighted regression
       Representation
           In this section, the DMPs model learned from multiple             min       (ftarget(s) −f(s))2   .           (12)
        demonstrations is ﬁrst introduced for position trajectory adap-
                                                                  There are three basic advantages of the DMPs model, which          tation. Furthermore, this DMPs framework is also extended for
                                                                         are follows:        the stiffness adaptation.
                                                                           1) the generated movement adapts to a new goal g with a            1) DMPs for Trajectory Planning: Generally, DMPs models
                                                                  smooth trajectory, which is similar to the original one;       can be classiﬁed into two types, i.e., the Discrete DMPs and the
                                                                                     thus, the model is spatially generalized;      Rhythmic DMPs with respect to different kinds of tasks. For
                                                                           2) the model can be generalized in temporal dimension just        the realization of the experimental task, i.e., the cutting task,
                                                                 by changing the temporal constant τ without affecting        the former type is used in this paper. A typical DMPs mode
                                                                                the shape of the movement trajectory; and       can be seen as a spring-damping system, which is derived by a
                                                                           3) by adding coupling terms to the differential equation (6),        canonical system. The model is deﬁned as follows [18]–[19]:
                                                                                the modiﬁed model is then able to have other abilities such
                    τ ˙v = k(g −x) −d ˙x + (g −x0)f(s)          (6)         as avoiding static or moving obstacles [21] and robustness
                                                                                   to external perturbations [30].                    τ ˙x = v                                         (7)
                                                                              2) DMPs for Stiffness Schedule: In [17], [22], and [31], the
       where x denotes the position of the robot endpoint or joint angle,   control policy K  (i.e., the gain of the robot joint impedance
       and v is the velocity. k and d represent the spring and damping   controller) is represented by a function approximator
        coefﬁcients of the system, respectively. The positive constant τ
          is the temporal scaling coefﬁcient. By adjusting the coefﬁcient                   M
                                              K =    ωiϕi(s)                  (13)         τ, duration of a task would be accordingly changed. x0 and g
        denote the initial and goal position, respectively. The external                              i=1
        force term f(s) is a nonlinear continuous bounded function. s  where ϕi(s) are basis functions. ωi are weighting parameters,
          is the state of a ﬁrst-order dynamic system, i.e., the canonical  which are calculated via a supervised learning algorithm and
        system, which shares the same temporal constant τ              optimized via a reinforcement learning algorithm.
                                                                          In fact, the function approximator is analogous to the force
                    τ ˙s = −αss,  s ∈[0, 1];  s(0) = 1           (8)
                                                                           function, i.e., f(s) in (9). Their framework only utilized a part of
       where the predeﬁned constant is represented by αs.              the DMPs model due to the lack of a reference stiffness proﬁle
         The state s can be seen as a phase variable, which is set to   that can be used for imitation learning. Therefore, it is only able
        monotonically decrease from 1 to 0. When s converges to zero,   to inherit parts of the merits of the DMPs model. There are three
        the external force term vanishes at the target point [see (9)]. Due   shortcomings of this framework, which are as follows.
         to the canonical system, the DMPs model depends not on time      1) The initial stiffness is set to be a constant value, and it
        but on the state s, which makes it possible to easily generalize        needs a learning process for the robot to obtain a variable
        the model to be suitable for other situations without changing          stiffness proﬁle. Thus, their framework is not efﬁcient in
        the movement trajectory.                                                 transferring skills from humans to a robot.


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
      YANG et al.: DMPS-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR ROBOT LEARNING AND GENERALIZATION OF HUMANLIKE VARIABLE IMPEDANCE SKILLS            1197





         Fig. 4.  Extended framework of the DMPs system. Two sets of transform systems are used to represent for position trajectories and stiffness
         proﬁles, respectively. The two systems are driven by the same canonical system using the same temporal scaling coefﬁcient τ in order to satisfy
       phase synchronization.



           2) The stiffness cannot be directly generalized to other sit-   transform systems are driven by the same canonical system such
              uations, i.e., the amplitude and duration cannot be easily   that the phase synchronization can be guaranteed. It means that
              adjusted to suit for similar tasks with different require-   the appropriate stiffness can be provided to the robot arm when
             ments.                                                                            it is needed. We use the notation p to represent the stiffness
           3) It is not allowed to be used in such scenarios where it   because the variable stiffness is evaluated from EMG signals
             only has one shot to ﬁnish a task because the trial-and-  and it can be seen as a stiffness indicator (see Section II-A). We
               error process is needed to learn the stiffness. Taking the  compute the stiffness DMPs model using the indicator [see (4)]
            example of cutting, we would like the robot to cut an   instead of the gains of all joints to reduce the computations.
              object in one time but not try several times to achieve a    The whole framework is demonstrated in Fig. 4 that is modi-
             proper stiffness proﬁle. Many similar examples can be  ﬁed from [22]. The calculation procedure for stiffness DMPs is
            found in industrial applications.                            similar to the process of movement DMPs and only needs minor
          In order to overcome these shortcomings, we extend the   modiﬁcations, i.e., replacing the input x with p and choosing
      framework in this paper based on the idea that a complete   proper parameters, such as the spring and damping coefﬁcients,
      motion  process  of  a  robot  should  include  both  position  and the number of basis functions.
        trajectories and stiffness proﬁles. Robots, just like humans,    To learn the weights from multiple demonstrations, we take a
       should be capable of both trajectory adaptation and stiffness   direct way to determine the weights. First, each demonstration
       adaptation such that they are able to learn and generalize highly    is evaluated with a score of the scale from 1 to 10 according
      humanlike skills. To that end, representation of trajectories and   to its corresponding performance. For each demonstration, a
        stiffness proﬁles can be treated equally. Inspired by [19], our   coefﬁcient κi is related to the scores πi and deﬁned as follows:
       extended framework can be described as:                                                         πi
                                                                                                κi =   L                        (17)
                                                      ˙s = h(s)                         (14)                                  i=1 πi

                                            ˙x = g1(x, s, γ)                   (15)  where L is the total number of the demonstrations. Then, the
                                                                  ﬁnal DMPs output Ω = {x, ˙x, p} is computed as
                                                  ˙p = g2(p, s, ω)                   (16)
                                                                                       L
      where h(s) is the canonical system and it is represented by (8).                                                      Ω =    κiΩi.                   (18)
       Equations (15) and (16) show the two transform systems that
                                                                                                   i=1
      one is used to encode position trajectories and another one for
                                                                    Thus, the multiple demonstrations can be integrated together        stiffness proﬁles. The output of the stiffness DMPs model, i.e.,
                                                                            to yield a ﬁnal output.      Ωi = {pi, ˙pi} is also obtained from (18). Note that these two



Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
         1198                                                          IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 23, NO. 3, JUNE 2018


                                                                             to determine the weight of each single demonstration. To that
                                                                      end, each one of the three subjects gives a score ranging from
                                                            1 to 10 for each signal demonstration according to the task exe-
                                                                        cution performance. If the system is unstable when the slave arm
                                                                         contacts with the object or the object is not cut well eventually
                                                                     during the demonstration, it will get a lower score, the weights
                                                                         are calculated by using (17). One may also employ objec-
                                                                                  tive approaches for learning from multiple demonstrations (see,
                                                                                        e.g., [33]).
                                                            The spring coefﬁcient k and damping coefﬁcient d of the
                                               DMPs model are set to 150 and 25, respectively. The numbers
                                                                        of basis functions are chosen: 100 and 50 for the trajectories
                                               DMPs and the stiffness DMPs, respectively. Once we achieve
                                                                         the generated movement trajectories and stiffness proﬁles that
                                                                   account for multiple demonstrations, the following two subtasks
                                                                         are conducted.
          Fig. 5.  Experimental setup for the cutting task during demonstration.       1) Movement Trajectory Planning Using the DMPs Model: In
                                                                                   this subtask, we would like to extend the ability of DMPs model
                                  III. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION                   for skill spatial generalization from position control mode to
                                                              impedance control mode. The goal is to generate the learned
         The humanoid dual-arm Baxter Research Robot (Baxter) de-
                                                                                       skill to cut an object in different spatial positions. In our case,
        veloped by Rethink Robotics is used in our experimental study.
                                                                                                           it is designed to cut a cucumber in different positions along the
       Each arm of the robot has 7 DoF, i.e., 2-DoF shoulder joint
                                                                             y-axis. The robot here is controlled in the EMG-based variable
        (S0, S1), 2-DoF elbow joint (E0, E1), and 3-DoF wrist joint
                                                              impedance mode. Note that in position control mode, only paths
       (W0, W1, W2). The kinematics model of the robot arm has
                                                               need to be planned, whereas in impedance control mode, both
       been developed in the previous work [32]. Joint stiffness and
                                                                         the paths and velocities should be adjusted. The generalized
       damping can be modiﬁed under torque control mode, which
                                                                                 trajectories and velocities are achieved just by changing the
          is implemented by the proportion-derivative impedance control
                                                                     proﬁle of the DMPs model, and they are shown in the top row in
         law. The human tutor’s muscle activity is monitored using a
                                                                           Fig. 6. It demonstrates that the generalized trajectories are very
    MYO device to collect raw EMG signals. Two tasks, cutting
                                                                           similar to the reference ones but converging to different goals.
       and lift place, are illustrated to justify the effectiveness of the
                                                           The results of this subtask are shown in the bottom row
       proposed method.
                                                                             in Fig. 6. Fig. 6(c) shows the measured endpoint position in
                                                                        y-axis of the robot slave arm. It demonstrates that the endpoint
       A. Cutting Task
                                                                   could generalize spatially to different positions. Fig. 6(d) shows
         The setup is shown in Fig. 5. During demonstration, one   the executed cuts. This subtask demonstrates that DMPs model
       arm of the robot is used as the master arm, which is physically   for skill spatial generalization can be successfully realized in
        attached to the human tutor’s limb endpoint through a specially  impedance control model.
        designed coupling device [13]. The other arm serves as a slave      2) Stiffness Schedule: One of the most important contribu-
        arm, and a knife is mounted onto its endpoint as a cutting tool.   tion of our proposed framework lies in the ability of generalizing
        In the teaching phase, the human tutor drives the master arm to   the stiffness proﬁles to suit for new given situations. This sub-
       move, and the slave arm follows the movement and learns the   task aims to demonstrate this point. To that end, we generalize
         patterns of the position trajectory and the stiffness proﬁle of the   the reference stiffness indicator (the reference terminal value
       hand of the human tutor. While in the following reproduction    is 0.65) to two different goals, e.g., 0.8 and 0.9, based on the
        phase, the slave arm is able to reproduce and generalize the   extended DMPs model, which is shown in Fig. 7(a). A different
        learned skill without the assistance of the master arm.            object is used for cutting in this subtask, which has a thicker
             First, in the teaching phase, the human tutor who has been   skin and larger hardness than the object used in the teaching
        involved in the stiffness calibration demonstrates the cutting   phase and the subtask above.
          skill through teleoperation ten times. The trajectories of the    The robot is required to perform the subtask ﬁve times under
        seven joints as well as the tutor’s limb EMG signals are recorded   each one of the three conditions described above, resulting in a
        during each demonstration. Note that the EMG signals can be   successful rate of 0/5, 1/5, and 5/5, respectively. Fig. 7(b)–(f)
        evaluated in an almost real-time manner; thus, we can directly  shows one typical result of this subtask. In this case, it shows
        record the EMG data and calculate the stiffness indicator p.       that the object cannot be successfully cut using the impedance
          Then, a direct way of computing the mixture of movement   control mode with the reference variable stiffness. And when
         primitives [see (17) and (18)] is used to generate one output of   the ﬁnal stiffness value is generalized to 0.8, the subtask still
        the DMPs model based on the multiple demonstrations. Note   cannot be successfully ﬁnished. Until it is generalized to a higher
         that learning from multiple demonstrations is not the main con-   value, i.e., 0.9, the object can be successfully cut. Note that
        cern of this paper. Therefore, a qualitative criterion is employed   there is a gap between the ﬁnal positions of the reference and


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
      YANG et al.: DMPS-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR ROBOT LEARNING AND GENERALIZATION OF HUMANLIKE VARIABLE IMPEDANCE SKILLS            1199





         Fig. 6.  T op: (a) and (b) are the planned trajectories for skill spatial generalization. Bottom: (c) is the measured robot endpoint position in y-axis;
         (d) shows the executed cut locations on the cucumber, two sets of numbers (1–6) mean this subtask is successfully performed twice (six cuts once).
       Cut no. 1 refers to the demonstrated one, and the others refer to the generalized ones. The solid lines denote the reference trajectories obtained
        from imitation learning and the dash lines denote the generalized ones.





         Fig. 7.  T op : (a) is the generalization of the stiffness indicator proﬁle to different goals. (b) and (c) are the measured positions and forces of the
        slave arm end-effector in z-axis, respectively. Bottom shows the different cuts by using the reference (d), the ﬁrst generalized (e), and the second
        generalized stiffness indicator proﬁles (f), respectively. The object can be cut successfully only by applying the second generalized stiffness proﬁle.
       Note that the object used to cut here is different from the object used in the ﬁrst subtask, as shown in Fig. 6.


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
         1200                                                          IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 23, NO. 3, JUNE 2018





          Fig. 8.  Experimental setup for the lift-place task.


        the second generalized trajectories, which represents the height
        of the object [see Fig. 7(b)]. From the perspective of force [see
         Fig. 7(c)], it can be seen that the robot lacks adaptability even
         in variable impedance control mode if the desirable stiffness
        proﬁle is not properly generalized, which is consistent with our
      common experience when people perform tasks.

       B. Lift-Place Task

         The setup for the lift-place task is shown in Fig. 8. There
        are two different objects used in this task, objects 1 and 2 have
        the same size (10 cm ×10 cm × 10 cm), but different weights:
        0.83 and 1.40 kg, respectively. The experimental procedure of
          this task is similar to the cutting task. During demonstration, the
       same human tutor teaches the robot to lift the object 1, pass over    Fig. 9.   Trajectories (a) and stiffness proﬁles (b) of the lift-place task.
        the obstacle (with a height of 18 cm), and ﬁnally place it on the
        goal (the red cross mark). The human tutor is required to lift the
                                                              C. Discussion
        object at as low height as possible to pass it over the obstacle for
        energy saving. After a given number of demonstrations, we can       It should be emphasized that subtask 2 in Section III-A and
        generate one integrated position trajectory and one integrated   subtask 3 in Section III-B are successfully performed just by
         stiffness proﬁle, as shown in Fig. 9. The parameters of the DMP   adapting the parameters of the DMPs model instead of teaching
       model are set as the same as in the cutting task.                  the robot again or requiring additional time-consuming pro-
         During the playback phase, the robot is required to perform   cess (e.g., [22] and [34]) for achieving the proper stiffness
        the task under three different situations: subtask 1: to lift and   proﬁles. Additionally, different combinations of the trajecto-
        place the object 1 to a new given goal (the black cross mark),   ries and the stiffness proﬁles can meet different requirements of
       which is 5 cm away from the old one, with the demonstrated   task situations based on the proposed framework. More specif-
         stiffness proﬁle (i.e., trajectory spatial schedule); subtask 2:   ically, by combining different movement trajectories with the
         to lift and place the object 2 to the new given goal with the  same stiffness proﬁle, skill spatial generalization under vari-
        demonstrated stiffness proﬁle (i.e., without stiffness schedule);   able impedance control mode can be realized (subtask 1 in
       and subtask 3: to lift and place the object 2 to the new goal with   Section III-A and subtask 1 in Section III-B), and by com-
        a generalized stiffness proﬁle (i.e., both trajectory and stiffness   bining different stiffness proﬁles with the same movement tra-
         generalization).                                                      jectory, then stiffness schedule can be realized (subtask 2 in
         Each subtask has been performed seven times. A success rate   Section III-A), or both trajectories and stiffness proﬁles can be
        of 7/7 is obtained in the ﬁrst subtask, which shows the skill   simultaneously achieved (subtask 3 in Section III-B). Further-
         spatial generalization has been successfully realized. The robot   more, the DMP-based framework is model free and available
        has ﬁnished the second task and the third subtask with a success   for different robotic platforms.
         rate of 1/7 and 6/7, respectively. The two comparative subtasks    The reference stiffness proﬁle for stiffness generalization is
        demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework for   obtained based on the extraction of the EMG signals and the
         stiffness schedule. Fig. 10 I–IV shows one typical example of   subsequent calculation for the endpoint stiffness estimates. The
        the demonstrations and the three subtasks, respectively.        human endpoint stiffness estimation method used in this pa-


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
      YANG et al.: DMPS-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR ROBOT LEARNING AND GENERALIZATION OF HUMANLIKE VARIABLE IMPEDANCE SKILLS            1201





         Fig. 10.  Experimental results of the lift-place task: I-(a)–(e), II-(a)–(e), III-(a)–(e), and IV-(a)–(e) show one typical example of the demonstrations,
        subtask 1, subtask 2, and subtask 3, respectively. The robot fails to perform subtask 2.


       per has been proved useful for impedance regulation in [27].                            IV. CONCLUSION
       Therefore, on one hand, the stiffness transfer and generaliza-
                                               We presented a novel framework for learning and generalizing
        tion is achieved conveniently and efﬁciently; on the other hand,
                                                               humanlike variable impedance skills. The goal was to enable a
       the reference stiffness proﬁle largely depends on the accura-
                                                                      robot to be capable of performing tasks in a humanlike way. The
        cies of the extracted EMG signals and the stiffness estimation
                                                                       merits of the EMG-based variable impedance control and the
       model. One may employ more complete stiffness estimation
                                         DMP model were integrated into our method for human–robot
      model to improve the accuracy of the estimated reference stiff-
                                                                                    skills transfer. To do so, the human tutor’s upper limb EMG
       ness proﬁle since the calculation efﬁciency of the estimation
                                                                          signals were extracted to capture his muscle stiffness features.
       during the demonstration phase is not a strict constraint in this
                                                         The estimated endpoint stiffness proﬁles then served as variable
        context.
                                                                      gains in the impedance controller. In this way, the human tutor is
         Regarding the way, multiple demonstrations are used to gen-
                                                                       able to naturally and intuitively transfer his impedance features
        erate a reference trajectory and a stiffness proﬁle (see Fig. 9).
                                                                       of a speciﬁc skill to the robot. The DMP framework was em-
      The weight of each single demonstration is determined in a qual-
                                                                 ployed and extended for both trajectory and stiffness schedule.
         itative way for simplicity. Other more objective methods such
                                                                                                It is worth noting that the stiffness planning and generalization
       as probabilistic movement primitives (e.g., [35]) can be utilized
                                                                            for skill transfer can be achieved using our proposed framework,
        to achieve the same purpose. Moreover, different human tutors
                                                            which is the ﬁrst time to be reported in the literature to the best
       have different demonstrations during the skill transfer process.
                                                                       of our knowledge.
       Thus, it may help robots to achieve a better performance of
                                                           The proposed framework was evaluated on a real robot with
       executing tasks by considering the variance between different
                                                                       multiple DoFs. The experimental results of the cutting and lift-
      humans, namely learning from different human tutors.
                                                                      place tasks have demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed
        The signiﬁcance of stiffness adaptation for human-to-robot
                                                                framework. It should be also mentioned that our method can
         skill transfer has been veriﬁed in [13]. The stiffness adaptive
                                                              be easily transplanted to other platforms, and this proposed
       process of the cutting task and the lift-place task can be seen
                                                             framework can also be applied to a number of potential ap-
        in Figs. 7(a) and 9(b), respectively. This paper introduces the
                                                                              plications, such as industrial robots, robotic exoskeletons, and
        capability of stiffness generalization, and therefore enriches the
                                                                 medical robotic systems, which are required to acquire human-
        diversity of the human-to-robot variable impedance transfer. In
                                                                               like manipulation skills.
       our tasks, the stiffness generalization refers to the regulation of
                                                                         In the future work, we will apply our method to perform more
       the stiffness proﬁle according to the task requirement. Taking,
                                                            complex tasks. For example, it can be applied to a human–robot
        for example, the lift-place task, during the reaching step the
                                                                        collaboration scenario, for instance a wood sawing task is per-
        stiffness is expected to remain small, and  it increases when
                                                             formed by a robot and a human collaborator (similar to [15]).
        larger stiffness is required to lift a heavier object. Surely, it can
                                                                       In these situations, research on the coordinated mechanism for
      be decreased accordingly as shown in Fig. 9(b).
                                                                  both movement generalization and stiffness scheduling would

Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
         1202                                                          IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 23, NO. 3, JUNE 2018


       be essential. Furthermore, the stiffness scheduling mechanism    [19] A. J. Ijspeert, J. Nakanishi, H. Hoffmann, P. Pastor, and S. Schaal, “Dynam-
      we established here can be combined with many other trajec-           ical movement primitives: Learning attractor models for motor behaviors,”
                                                                                      Neural Comput., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 328–373, 2013.
         tory expression tools, such as Gaussian mixture model, together    [20] A. Ude, A. Gams, T. Asfour, and J. Morimoto, “Task-speciﬁc generaliza-
         to achieve variable impedance control for robots, which could          tion of discrete and periodic dynamic movement primitives,” IEEE Trans.
        enrich the diversity of the skills that robots are able to learn.             Robot., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 800–815, Oct. 2010.
                                                                                          [21] H. Hoffmann, P. Pastor, D. H. Park, and S. Schaal, “Biologically-inspired
                                                                                      dynamical systems for movement generation: Automatic real-time goal
                    ACKNOWLEDGMENT                                   adaptation and obstacle avoidance,” in Proc. 2009 IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
                                                                                          Autom., May 2009, pp. 2587–2592.
         The authors would like to thank the editors and the anonymous    [22]  F. Stulp, J. Buchli, A. Ellmer, M. Mistry, E. A. Theodorou, and S. Schaal,
        reviewers for their insightful comments that helped them to        “Model-free reinforcement learning of impedance control in stochastic
                                                                                            environments,” IEEE Trans. Auton. Mental Develop., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 330–
       improve the quality of this paper.                                           341, Dec. 2012.
                                                                                          [23] A. Gams, B. Nemec, A. J. Ijspeert, and A. Ude, “Coupling movement
                                                                                                     primitives: Interaction with the environment and bimanual tasks,” IEEE
                         REFERENCES                                    Trans. Robot., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 816–830, Aug. 2014.
                                                                                          [24] M. Tykal, A. Montebelli, and V. Kyrki, “Incrementally assisted kinesthetic
            [1] A. Billard, S. Calinon, R. Dillmann, and S. Schaal, “Robot programming
                                                                                             teaching for programming by demonstration,” in Proc. 11th ACM/IEEE
             by demonstration,” in Springer Handbook of Robotics. New York, NY,
                                                                                                                    Int. Conf. Human–Robot Interaction, 2016, pp. 205–212.
            USA: Springer, 2008, pp. 1371–1394.
                                                                                          [25] B.  Nemec,  N.  Likar,  A.  Gams,  and  A.  Ude, “Human  robot
            [2]  S.  Calinon,  Robot  Programming  by  Demonstration.  Lausanne,
                                                                                            cooperation  with  compliance  adaptation  along  the  motion   tra-
                Switzerland: EPFL Press, 2009.
                                                                                                           jectory,”  Auton.  Robots,  pp.  1–13,  2017.  [Online].  Available:
            [3]  P. Kormushev, S. Calinon, and D. G. Caldwell, “Imitation learning of
                                                                                                https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10514-017-9676-3
                 positional and force skills demonstrated via kinesthetic teaching and haptic
                                                                                          [26]  S.-F. Chen and I. Kao, “Conservative congruence transformation for joint
                 input,” Adv. Robot., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 581–603, 2011.
                                                                                  and Cartesian stiffness matrices of robotic hands and ﬁngers,” Int. J. Robot.
            [4] L. Rozo, S. Calinon, D. G. Caldwell, P. Jimenez, and C. Torras, “Learning
                                                                                                      Res., vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 835–847, 2000.
                 collaborative impedance-based robot behaviors,” AAAI Conf. Artiﬁcial
                                                                                          [27] A. Ajoudani, N. Tsagarakis, and A. Bicchi, “Tele-impedance: Teleoper-
                    Intell., Bellevue, WA, USA, 2013, pp. 1422–1428.
                                                                                                   ation with impedance regulation using a body–machine interface,” Int.
            [5]  F. Steinmetz, A. Montebelli, and V. Kyrki, “Simultaneous kinesthetic
                                                                                                                      J. Robot. Res., vol. 31, no. 13, pp. 1642–1656, 2012.
                teaching of positional and force requirements for sequential in-contact
                                                                                          [28] A. Ajoudani, C. Fang, N. G. Tsagarakis, and A. Bicchi, “A reduced-
                  tasks,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE-RAS 15th Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (Hu-
                                                                                        complexity description of arm endpoint stiffness with applications to
               manoids), Nov. 2015, pp. 202–209.
                                                                                         teleimpedance control,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
            [6] L. Rozo, S. Calinon, D. G. Caldwell, P. Jimenez, and C. Torras, “Learning
                                                                                                                 Syst., Sep. 2015, pp. 1017–1023.
                physical collaborative robot behaviors from human demonstrations,” IEEE
                                                                                          [29] X. Ding and C. Fang, “A novel method of motion planning for an an-
                Trans. Robot., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 513–527, Jun. 2016.
                                                                                       thropomorphic arm based on movement primitives,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
            [7] E. Burdet, R. Osu, D. W. Franklin, T. E. Milner, and M. Kawato, “The
                                                                                          Mechatronics, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 624–636, Apr. 2013.
                 central nervous system stabilizes unstable dynamics by learning optimal
                                                                                          [30]  J. Kober, B. Mohler, and J. Peters, “Learning perceptual coupling for
              impedance,” Nature, vol. 414, no. 6862, pp. 446–449, 2001.
                                                                                   motor primitives,” in Proc. 2008 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots. Syst.,
            [8] M. Howard, D.  J. Braun, and S. Vijayakumar, “Transferring human
                                                                                          Sep. 2008, pp. 834–839.
              impedance behavior to heterogeneous variable impedance actuators,”
                                                                                          [31] L. Zhijun, T. Zhao, F. Chen, Y. Hu, C.-Y. Su, and T. Fukuda, “Reinforce-
            IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 847–862, Aug. 2013.
                                                                               ment learning of manipulation and grasping using dynamical movement
            [9]  F. Ficuciello, L. Villani, and B. Siciliano, “Variable impedance control of
                                                                                                   primitives for a humanoid-like mobile manipulator,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
               redundant manipulators for intuitive human–robot physical interaction,”
                                                                                          Mechatronics, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 121–131, Feb. 2018.
            IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 850–863, Aug. 2015.
                                                                                          [32] Z. Ju, C. Yang, and H. Ma, “Kinematics modeling and experimental ver-
          [10] W. He and Y. Dong, “Adaptive fuzzy neural network control for a con-
                                                                                                 iﬁcation of Baxter robot,” in Proc. 33rd Chin. Control Conf., Jul. 2014,
                 strained robot using impedance learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
                                                                                               pp. 8518–8523.
               Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 1174–1186, Apr. 2018.
                                                                                          [33]  S. Calinon, F. D’halluin, D. G. Caldwell, and A. G. Billard, “Handling
          [11]  P. Liang, C. Yang, N. Wang, Z. Li, R. Li, and E. Burdet, “Implemen-
                                                                                               of multiple constraints and motion alternatives in a robot programming
                 tation and test of human-operated and human-like adaptive impedance
                                                                               by demonstration framework,” in Proc. 2009 9th IEEE-RAS Int. Conf.
                controls on Baxter robot,” in Advances in Autonomous Robotics Systems.
                                                                           Humanoid Robots, Dec. 2009, pp. 582–588.
           New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2014, pp. 109–119.
                                                                                          [34] K. Kronander, M. Khansari, and A. Billard, “Incremental motion learning
          [12] C. Yang, P. Liang, A. Ajoudani, Z. Li, and A. Bicchi, “Development of
                                                                                         with locally modulated dynamical systems,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 70,
               a robotic teaching interface for human to human skill transfer,” in Proc.
                                                                                               pp. 52–62, 2015.
             2016 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Oct. 2016, pp. 710–716.
                                                                                          [35] A. Paraschos, E. Rueckert, J. Peters, and G. Neumann, “Model-free prob-
          [13] C. Yang, C. Zeng, P. Liang, Z. Li, R. Li, and C. Y. Su, “Interface design of
                                                                                                                 abilistic movement primitives for physical interaction,” in Proc. 2015
               a physical human-robot interaction system for human impedance adaptive
                                                                               IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots. Syst., Sep. 2015, pp. 2860–2866.
                   skill transfer,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 329–340,
                 Jan. 2018.
          [14] B. Yuan, M. Sekine, J. Gonzalez, J. Tames, W. Yu, and B. Yuan, “Variable
              impedance control based on impedance estimation model with EMG
                 signals during extension and ﬂexion tasks for a lower limb rehabilitation
                robotic system,” J. Novel Physiotherapies, vol. 3, no. 178, p. 2, 2013.
                [Online]. Available: https://www.omicsonline.org/open-access/variable-
               impedance-control-based-on-impedance-estimation-model-with-emg-                      Chenguang Yang (M’10–SM’16) received the
                signals-during-extension-and-ﬂexion-tasks-for-a-lower-limb-                                  B.Eng. degree in measurement and control from
               rehabilitation-robotic-system-2165-7025-178.php?aid=19135                                 Northwestern  Polytechnical  University,  Xi’an,
          [15] L. Peternel, T. Petriˇc, E. Oztop, and J. Babiˇc, “Teaching robots to cooperate                         China, in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree in con-
               with humans in dynamic manipulation tasks based on multi-modal human-                                   trol engineering from the National University of
                in-the-loop approach,” Auton. Robots, vol. 36, no. 1–2, pp. 123–136, 2014.                         Singapore, Singapore, in 2010.
          [16] A. Ajoudani, Transferring Human Impedance Regulation Skills to Robots,                     He received postdoctoral training at Imperial
                 vol. 110. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2016.                                              College London, London, U.K. His research in-
          [17]  J. Buchli, F. Stulp, E. Theodorou, and S. Schaal, “Learning variable                            terests include robotics and automation.
              impedance control,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 820–833, 2011.                               Dr. Yang is a recipient of the Best Paper Award
          [18]  S. Schaal, P. Mohajerian, and A. Ijspeert, “Dynamics systems vs. optimal                        from the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS and
             control—A unifying view,” Prog. Brain Res., vol. 165, pp. 425–445, 2007.   a number of international conferences.


Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
      YANG et al.: DMPS-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR ROBOT LEARNING AND GENERALIZATION OF HUMANLIKE VARIABLE IMPEDANCE SKILLS            1203



                       Chao Zeng received the M.S. degree in preci-                        Zhijun Li (M’07–SM’09) received the Ph.D. de-
                               sion instruments and mechanics from Shanghai                        gree in mechatronics from Shanghai Jiao Tong
                                   University, Shanghai, China, in 2016. He is cur-                             University, Shanghai, China, in 2002.
                                   rently working toward the Ph.D. degree in pattern                        From 2003 to 2005, he was a Postdoc-
                                recognition and intelligent system at the College                               toral Fellow with the Department of Mechani-
                                  of Automation Science and Engineering, South                            cal Engineering and Intelligent Systems, Univer-
                           China University  of Technology, Guangzhou,                                sity of Electro-Communications, Tokyo, Japan.
                              China.                                                     From 2005 to 2006, he was a Research Fellow
                                His research interests include human–robot                           with the Department of Electrical and Computer
                                   interaction, programming by demonstration, and                          Engineering, National University of Singapore,
                           human–robot skill transfers.                                           Singapore, and Nanyang Technological Univer-
                                                                                                              sity, Singapore. Since 2012, he has been a Professor with the College of
                                                                         Automation Science and Engineering, South China University of Technol-
                       Cheng Fang (M’17) received the Ph.D. de-
                                                                                  ogy, Guangzhou, China. His research interests include service robotics,
                             gree in mechanical design and theory from the
                                                                                   teleoperation systems, nonlinear control, neural network optimization,                             Robotics Research Institute, Beihang University,
                                                                                           etc.
                                   Beijing, China, in 2013.
                                                                                          Dr.  Li has been the Co-Chair  of the Technical Committee on
                         He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher
                                                                           Biomechatronics and Biorobotics Systems of the IEEE Systems, Man
                                with  the Humanoids and Human Centered
                                                                  and Cybernetics Society, and the Technical Committee on Neuro-
                             Mechatronics Lab, Italian Institute of Technol-
                                                                            Robotics Systems of the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society, since
                                ogy, Genoa, Italy. His research interests include
                                                                         2016. He is an Editor-at-Large for the Journal of Intelligent and Robotic
                           human–robot interaction, musculoskeletal mod-
                                                                        Systems, and an Associate Editor for several IEEE transactions. He was                                  eling of human body, and task-motion planning
                                                                               the General Chair and Program Chair of 2016 and 2017 IEEE Confer-
                          and control of anthropomorphic arms.
                                                                    ence on Advanced Robotics and Mechatronics, respectively.

                         Wei He (M’12–SM’16) received his B.Eng. and
                                 his M.Eng. degrees both in control theory and
                              engineering from College of Automation Sci-
                          ence and Engineering, South China University of
                            Technology (SCUT), China, in 2006 and 2008,
                                  respectively, and his PhD degree in electrical
                          and computer engineering from Department of
                                   Electrical & Computer Engineering, the National
                                 University of Singapore (NUS), Singapore, in
                             2011. He is currently working as a full profes-
                               sor in School of Automation and Electrical Engi-
        neering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China.
      He has co-authored 2 book published in Springer and published over
       100 international journal and conference papers. He has been awarded
       a Newton Advanced Fellowship from the Royal Society, UK. He is a
         recipient of the IEEE SMC Society Andrew P. Sage Best Transactions
       Paper Award in 2017. He serves as an Associate Editor of IEEE Trans-
        actions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, IEEE Transactions
       on Control Systems Technology, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man,
       and Cybernetics: Systems and IEEE Access, and an Editor of IEEE/CAA
        Journal of Automatica Sinica, Neurocomputing, and Journal of Intelligent
      & Robotic Systems. He is the member of the IFAC TC on Distributed Pa-
        rameter Systems, IFAC TC on Computational Intelligence in Control and
       IEEE CSS TC on Distributed Parameter Systems. His current research
         interests include robotics, distributed parameter systems and intelligent
         control systems.





Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 28,2026 at 09:53:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.