=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
       232                                                                               IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 23, NO. 2, APRIL 2007

    Complementary Stability and Loop Shaping for
         Improved Human–Robot Interaction

                                       Stephen P. Buerger and Neville Hogan




        Abstract—Robots intended for high-force interaction with hu-   as fully programmable exercise machines and cooperative as-
     mans face particular challenges to achieve performance and sta-  sembly systems. However, in developing therapy robot modules
        bility. They require low and tunable endpoint impedance as well                                                                          to treat more functions and limbs [6], [7], we have observed
      as high force capacity, and demand actuators with low intrinsic
                                                                             that actuator technology is the most prominent limiting factor.      impedance, the ability to exhibit high impedance (relative to the
     human subject), and a high ratio of force to weight. Force-feedback   Sensor technology [8] has improved dramatically in recent
       control can be used to improve actuator performance, but causes   decades (partly enabled by microelectromechanical systems
      well-known interaction stability problems. This paper presents a  (MEMS) technology), computational capacity continues to
      novel method to design actuator controllers for physically interac-                                                         grow following Moore’s Law [9], but advances in actuator
       tive machines. A loop-shaping design method is developed from a
                                                                 technology have lagged behind. This limitation is particularly      study of fundamental differences between interaction control and
      the more common servo problem. This approach addresses the in-   acute as we consider high-force haptics, machines capable of
       teraction problem by redeﬁning stability and performance, using   generating forces up to a human’s body weight while providing
      a computational approach to search parameter spaces and dis-   a gentle, compliant behavior. This requires actuators with
      playing variations in performance as control parameters are ad-                                                           low and tunable endpoint mechanical impedance as well as
       justed. A measure of complementary stability is introduced, and
                                                                 high force density (the ratio of force capacity to weight), but      the coupled stability problem is transformed to a robust stability
      problem using limited knowledge of the environment dynamics (in   available technologies (e.g., electromagnetic, hydraulic, pneu-
       this case, the human). Design examples show that this new measure   matic) generally excel in at most one of these capacities. In this
      improves performance beyond the current best-practice stability   paper, we consider the design of feedback-control strategies to
       constraint (passivity). The controller was implemented on an inter-                                                             improve and/or sculpt actuator behavior. We expose challenges
       active robot, verifying stability and performance. Testing showed
                                                                      of the interaction control problem that have hampered design       that the new controller out-performed a state-of-the-art controller
     on the same system.                                             of effective controllers, and propose a novel design method
                                                                          to shape controller dynamics for improved performance and
        Index Terms—Actuators, control systems, force control, haptics,
                                                                                   stability.     man–machine systems, robots.
                                              We deﬁne physical interaction between a controlled system
                                                            and another object to occur when the static or dynamic prop-
                                                                                erties of the system formed by coupling the two together differ
                                                                      signiﬁcantly from those of the controlled system in isolation.
                          I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND                Interacting systems often exchange signiﬁcant energy, but en-
                                                                  ergy transfer is not necessary to create interaction; for example,
      NTIMATE physical interaction and cooperation with hu-   a robot pushing on a completely rigid wall transfers no net en-
       mans is an exciting and challenging frontier of robotics.   ergy, but is dynamically quite different from the same robot in  I      Robotic therapy  is a  rapidly emerging  application which   isolation. Interaction can alter both performance and stability of
      has already proven effective even in limited forms [1], [2].   the controlled system; that is, a system that is stable and satisﬁes
     Robots capable of safe, controllable physical interaction enable   performance objectives in isolation may be unstable or perform
       this application, as well as haptic devices [3], teleoperated   inadequately when coupled to another system [10].
      master–slave systems [4], [5], and advanced applications such     Although interaction control has been investigated for several
                                                                    decades, the available design tools remain substantially more
                                                         cumbersome and less effective than those used for classical
         Manuscript received January 20, 2006; revised August 22, 2006. This paper   servo design. Most controllers for interacting systems either
      was recommended for publication by Associate Editor P. Rocco and Editor K.   regulate force directly or regulate static and dynamic behavior
      Lynch upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was supported   at the interaction port, the location of interaction. Whitney
        in part by a National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship, in
        part by the Burke Medical Research Institute, in part by the National Institutes   ﬁrst introduced control based on measured force signals in
        of Health under Grant R01-HD37397, and in part by the Spinal Cord Injury   the late 1970s [11]. Work on direct force control spans a wide
       Board of New York State.                                         range of possible forms, including proportional [12], pure
          S. P. Buerger is with the Intelligent Systems, Robotics and Cybernetics
       Group, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM 87185 USA (e-mail:   integral (I) [13], [14], proportional-integral (PI) [15], propor-
       sbuerge@sandia.gov).                                                  tional-derivative [16], model-based control [15], and controllers
         N. Hogan is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering and the Depart-   with interior motion-control loops [17]. However, a widely
      ment of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
       Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: neville@mit.edu).                   accepted framework to determine the tuning of gains or the
           Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TRO.2007.892229                   placement of controller poles and zeros is lacking. Most prior

                                                               1552-3098/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
     BUERGER AND HOGAN: COMPLEMENTARY STABILITY AND LOOP SHAPING FOR IMPROVED HUMAN–ROBOT INTERACTION                             233


       literature in force control argues the merits of one controller
     form or another without providing a systematic framework to
     guide controller design.
     A generally more robust approach to interaction control reg-
                                                                                           Fig. 1.  Block diagram representation of a typical servo-controlled system.
      ulates dynamic behavior at the interaction port. While conven-   H(s) is a scalar-valued complex transfer function of the Laplace variable s that
      tional motion and force control regulate variables that depend on    represents the open-loop input–output plant dynamics. G (s) is a controller
                                                                                              transfer function. A reference command r is compared with the measured     both interacting systems, this approach regulates properties that                                                                                     output x, and the error is input to the controller. The controller output u serves
     depend solely on the controlled system, independent of the en-    as the input to the plant.
      vironment. One such property is mechanical impedance,1 which
     determines an output force (torque) time function from an input
      velocity (angular velocity) time function at the same port. Early   locus, frequency response design) in the accurate and simul-
     work on impedance control [18] assumed that it was possible   taneous analysis of the effect of control parameters on both
      to achieve arbitrary impedance, and it was postulated that sta-   stability and performance. Potential threats to stability such
       bility could be guaranteed by making a robot emulate a physical   as noncollocation, time delay, etc., cannot easily be included;
     system that was itself known to be stable in performing the task   the target inertia is the only measure of passivity or stability
       (e.g., a damped spring). The impedance could also be sculpted  and the only parameter that can be intelligently designed for
      to achieve task performance, for example, maximizing energy   stability margin.
      transfer [18] or representing “virtual objects” [3], [10].        We argue that deﬁciencies of the tools available for control
        Unfortunately,  it proved to be impossible to achieve truly   design are a signiﬁcant factor limiting the development of
      arbitrary impedance on any real robotic device, regardless of   physically interactive robotic technology. This paper articulates
      sensor, actuator, or control implementations. In practice, when   fundamental differences between the interaction problem and
     a controller attempts to emulate dynamics that differ signiﬁ-   the more common servo control problem as the source of the
      cantly from the intrinsic hardware dynamics, an increased risk   design difﬁculties, introduces a method to approximate clas-
      of coupled or contact instability arises [19]. This has been ex-   sical loop-shaping design for interacting systems, and provides
      plained using the concept of passivity (deﬁned in [20]). Col-   a method to incorporate limited knowledge of the environ-
      gate proved that when two stable systems with passive port  ment to improve performance. Section II exposes structural
      functions are physically coupled together, stability is guaran-   differences between servo and interaction control, and makes
      teed [20]. Because many physical objects are passive (including   the fundamental point that even when analysis is restricted to
       all combinations of inertias, dampers, springs, and constraints),   single-input, single-output (SISO) systems and even when the
     a stable robot with passive port impedance can couple stably   robot and environment are both exactly modeled, servo control
      to an extremely large and useful set of environments, making   design procedures do not translate directly to the interaction
      passivity a desirable property. However, Colgate showed that   problem. In Section III, a procedure is introduced that provides
        if endpoint force feedback is used to reduce apparent endpoint   one way to approximate loop-shaping design for interacting
       inertia by more than 50% below its physical value, the system   systems. Section IV introduces a stability measure for use with
     becomes nonpassive. This limitation results from dynamics (re-   the new design method that applies knowledge of the environ-
      gardless of characteristic frequency) between the force sensor  ment dynamics to improve performance. Section V describes
     and the actuator, holds regardless of implementation, and se-   the validation on robotic hardware of a controller designed with
      verely limits the performance of force controllers and most ad-   the new procedure, and compares it with a natural admittance
     vanced impedance controllers [21]. Discrete control, time de-   controller. Conclusions are presented in Section VI.
      lays, actuator and sensor limitations, and unmodeled dynamics
                                                                                                          II. CLASSICAL AND INTERACTION CONTROL
     can also compromise passivity, making the implementation of
                                                       Key differences between servo and interaction control require      passive control on real systems extraordinarily challenging.
       Recognizing  the fundamental  limit on  apparent  inertia   that the two problems be treated with different tools. The dif-
      reduction, Newman introduced natural admittance  control   ferences are most easily demonstrated using scalar functions.
                                                     SISO controller design, covered in detail in many textbooks     (NAC), an approach that permits reduction of apparent friction
                                                                                     (e.g., [23]), consists of shaping controller dynamics to achieve     independent from inertia, facilitating the design of theoretically
      passive friction-rejecting interaction controllers [22]. In theory,   suitable performance and stability margin. Given a realistic rep-
                                                                        resentation (often a mathematical model) of sensors, actuators,      passivity (and therefore, coupled stability) is ensured  if the
                                                            and system dynamics, including the primary source(s) of insta-      target inertia is kept above half the physical value, and per-
                                                                                        bility, familiar tools such as Bode, Nyquist, or root locus anal-     formance is manipulated by adjusting other target impedance
      parameters. Because NAC provides a means of addressing   ysis can be applied. Given the linear SISO servo system shown
                                                                          in block diagram form in Fig. 1, two key features can be high-     both stability and performance in a joint framework, it offers
                                                                         lighted that enable design with these tools. The ﬁrst is that al-     a signiﬁcant improvement on earlier methods. Yet NAC falls
                                                              though closed-loop stability and performance determine actual      well short of classical tools for servo control design (e.g., root
                                                              system behavior, both can be predicted and characterized using
        1Impedance is generally denoted by the operator Z, and its inverse, the me-                                                                       the open-loop transfer function (OLTF)          . Bode, Nyquist,
       chanical admittance, by the operator Y . Both are examples of port functions,
      which deﬁne behavior at ports of interaction by providing a relationship between  and root locus all provide ways to translate properties of the
       input and output energy variables.                          OLTF to the closed-loop system, such that manipulation of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
       234                                                                               IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 23, NO. 2, APRIL 2007


                                                                       the closed-loop system, or the roots of                     . Nyquist
                                                                          plots of      can be used to evaluate stability, and can also be
                                                                      cautiously used to determine some measure of the “distance to
                                                                              instability” or the stability margin, though this measure does not
                                                                             translate directly to a scaled controller gain in this case, and must
        Fig. 2.  Block diagram representation of a robot coupled to an environment.   be interpreted carefully, as shown in   below.
       Because the robot is represented by an impedance Z  , the environment is rep-     Performance, on the other hand, requires alternative measures
        resented by an admittance (Y ).                                                                          to those used for servo systems. For the system in Fig. 1, per-
                                                             formance is measured by the relationship between the input
                                                                        variable  and the output variable    , whether or not a control
      former produces predictable effects on the latter. The second key   loop is closed. Those measures do not apply to the system in
      feature is that the controller    appears as a direct multiplier of   Fig. 2, partly because the model features no relevant input and
      the plant   in the OLTF, such that changes to the controller pre-   output. Further, while measures of interactive performance may
      dictably change the open-loop magnitude and phase, and there-   vary with system and task, they are best determined by the be-
       fore, stability and performance. In SISO loop-shaping design,   havior of the controlled robot alone. When a robot is expected
      performance, stability, and controller complexity are traded off   to manage interaction with several different or uncertain envi-
     by placing controller poles and zeros and tuning the loop gain.   ronments, to specify performance based on behavior of the cou-
     Here we show that these two features are absent from the inter-   pled system (e.g., natural frequencies, damping) can be imprac-
      action problem, and that controller design is therefore hindered.    tical; for instance, it is unrealistic (and probably undesirable)
                                                                          to expect comparable dynamic behavior when a robot moves in
      A. Limits of Input–Output Formulation                           free space as when it pushes against a rigid constraint, yet both
                                                                        tasks may be needed for some applications. For human-interac-
     A ﬁrst impulse to model an interacting closed-loop system
                                                                               tive robots, the robot port behavior, colloquially termed “feel,”
     might be to add an “environment” block to the right of Fig. 1,
                                                                                       is usually the best way to represent desired performance [24].
      such that the output    serves as the input to the environ-
                                                                 Haptic devices, for example, depend on their ability to emulate
      ment. However this would imply an assumption that contact
                                                                      appropriate static and dynamic properties to render virtual ob-
      with the environment does not affect the controlled system’s
                                                                                  jects; these properties are quantiﬁed by the port function. Thus,
      input–output behavior, which directly contradicts the deﬁnition
                                                                        quite aside from any stability beneﬁt, the desire to directly reg-
      of physical interaction provided in Section  I. Instead,  it  is
                                                                          ulate port behavior is an important motivation for impedance
      necessary to incorporate any environment dynamics into the
                                                                           control.
     model used to derive Fig. 1, generally embedding them in the
                                                                        In terms of the notation of Fig. 2, if performance is measured
      plant   (an example is carried out in [24]). With this approach,
                                                          on the basis of robot behavior alone (and we argue that it usu-
         it is possible in theory to derive a stable controller. However,
                                                                             ally should be), then it is related to    but not to     ; it is com-
      the result would only be valid for a single, precisely modeled
                                                                          pletely independent of the environment. Performance depends
      environment, and it would be rare to ﬁnd an environment that
                                                                       exclusively on the portion of the OLTF related to the robot, and
      could be characterized as accurately and conﬁdently as nec-
                                                               performance measures should reﬂect this. The robot dynamics
       essary. With uncertainty in the parameters or particularly the
                                                                   play a critical role in determining both interaction stability and
       structure of the environment, this approach is even less viable
                                                                  performance, while the environment dynamics are equally crit-
       [24]. Direct application of servo techniques to this input–output
                                                                                ical to stability but irrelevant to performance. Controller design
     model of interaction is of little value.
                                                            must consider two quantities: the OLTF         , which determines
                                                                                     stability, and the robot impedance      , which exclusively deter-
      B.  Stability and Performance                                                             mines performance. This is the ﬁrst major difference between
        Input–output block diagram analysis  is cumbersome for   servo and interaction control.
       interaction problems because loading requires independent
      derivation of a full set of state equations for each environment.
      Port functions provide a superior means of representing coupled   C. Control and Port Functions
      physical systems in block diagram form, because they are based
     on conjugate power variables, such that their connection implies   A second major difference between the servo and interaction
     no assumption about loading [25]. Fig. 2 shows a block dia-   control transfer function structures hampers predictable manip-
     gram model of two coupled single-degree-of-freedom (DOF)   ulation of closed-loop dynamics through the interaction con-
      systems, a robot and an environment, represented by their port    troller. Unlike in the system of Fig. 1, the controller does not
      functions. The block diagram representation resembles Fig. 1   appear as a multiplier in the OLTF; in fact, no controller ap-
       in its equivalence to a unity negative feedback system, with the   pears directly in the interaction problem as formulated in Fig. 2.
    OLTF       (or        ). The system can be analyzed by applying  The effect of any controller (if there is one) is embedded in      ,
       classical SISO tools to this function. However, the use of these  which also includes the model of the physical robot. If the robot
     methods for design is inhibited by several factors.              hardware is assumed to be a generic “black box” system, with an
       Because Fig. 2 provides an exact feedback representation of   actuator driving one side and an interaction port at the other, this
      the interacting system, stability is determined by the poles of   can be represented with a “two-port” (a system with two power
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
     BUERGER AND HOGAN: COMPLEMENTARY STABILITY AND LOOP SHAPING FOR IMPROVED HUMAN–ROBOT INTERACTION                             235


                                                                   servo design is lost for interactive design. This is true even for
                                                                 simple SISO robot models, and even in the unlikely case when
                                                                       the environment is well modeled.

        Fig. 3.  Generic two-port. The force and velocity at the actuator side, F  and                    III. COMPUTATIONAL LOOP SHAPING
      v  , respectively, and at the environment side, F  and v  , are shown. In between
       are arbitrary dynamics. Such a model can be used for any SISO robot.          Because classical SISO tools cannot be applied directly to de-
                                                                     sign interaction controllers, alternative methods to facilitate the
                                                                         tradeoff of stability and performance are needed. This section
      interfaces that can be connected to other systems), as shown in   introduces one approach, modeled on loop shaping, that lever-
      Fig. 3.                                                     ages computing power to explore a large set of possible combi-
          If the robot model is assumed linear, the two-port can be de-   nations of control parameters. Because there is no obvious way
     ﬁned by a matrix of transfer functions relating the velocity and   to consider stability and performance as properties of a single
      force at each port to each other                                  quantity (as in the servo problem), they are treated separately
                                                                    before assembling a composite set of results. Measures of sta-
                                                                                  bility and performance are established, and constrained opti-
                                                                    (1)   mization is used to search the controller parameter space for
                                                                        solutions that maximize performance while satisfying a stability
     Each of the     entries are transfer functions. Here the actuator   constraint. The procedure may be repeated to explore changes to
       is assumed to be a force source, and the environment interface   the controller structure. The results suggest nonobvious control
       is in impedance causality. If the port variables     ,     , and   are   implementations that can improve performance substantially, as
      fed back and multiplied by compensator transfer functions      ,  shown in the examples.
               , and      , respectively, the resulting control law is              Like virtually all controller design and analysis approaches,
                                                                                this method requires a representation of the system to be con-
                                                                                 trolled. It may be arbitrarily complex to satisfy the requirements
                                                                    (2)   of a particular problem or application but, at a minimum, it must
                                                                    include the primary source of instability. In the examples below,
       If this is applied to (1), the output impedance at port 2 is                                                                coupled stability problems originate from attempts to change
                                                                       the robot’s apparent port impedance using force feedback. To
                                                                    (3)                                                                       represent this problem, a model must include at least one res-
     This shows the relationship between the compensators      onance between the actuator and the sensor;2 a simple iner-
     and the port function. None of the individual compensators    tial model as used in [22] is inadequate. In addition to repre-
     (and no combination of them) appears multiplicatively in the   senting the physical system, a form must be assumed for the
      port impedance      . No controller enters linearly into either   controller. This must include at least one variable parameter
      the OLTF       (the quantity that determines stability), or      (and possibly many). It may be helpful for at least one param-
     (which determines performance), and there is no straightfor-   eter to vary monotonically with performance (e.g., an error-cor-
     ward way to manipulate the magnitude and phase of either   rection gain), but this is not essential. Because the frequency
     through the controller. A change to the magnitude and phase of   response of the robot port impedance is used for the examples,
               , for instance, transforms the magnitude and phase of    in a   the robot model and controller are assumed to be linear. Non-
     complicated way that depends on each of the transfer functions   linear models could be used in principle, assuming stability and
          as well as on    and      .                                performance can be adequately quantiﬁed, but as yet have not
       With speciﬁc model parameters, stability can be checked   been tested. The computational loop-shaping framework per-
      using a Nyquist plot, but the contour cannot be reshaped in a   mits various measures of stability. For interaction, stability must
      straightforward way by altering the compensators. That is why   be guaranteed when coupled to any expected environment(s).
      servo tools are ineffective for interaction controller design. This   Measures should be selected based on the application, but the
      limitation persists even with the assumption of a complete and   stability constraint should not be so conservative as to hinder
      exact model of the environment    ; it is fundamental to analysis   performance. In Example 1, passivity is used, while Section IV
     with port functions, which are required to represent interaction   describes a new measure that reduces conservatism.
      in block diagrams. This feature also impacts the interpretation     Performance can be quantiﬁed by a desired port function; per-
      of stability margins: while a signiﬁcant distance of a coupled   formance error is the deviation from this target function. High
     system’s Nyquist plot from the  1 point may offer some coarse   admittance has been used as a performance objective for inter-
      indication of stability robustness, this information cannot be   acting systems, derived from a desire for low contact forces [22].
      translated directly into controller gain or phase, because these  Here the deviation from the magnitude of the desired impedance
      quantities may be related in a highly nonlinear way to the port   (the inverse of admittance) is used; there is no compelling reason
      function. Thus, even as an analysis tool, the Nyquist plot has   to use the phase, and several factors complicate its inclusion
      limited value for interactive systems.                              [24]. Fig. 4 shows the magnitude and phase of the endpoint
       Summarizing, in general, SISO tools cannot effectively be ap-  impedance for two mechanical systems. The solid trace shows
      plied to design interaction controllers for stability and perfor-      2Colgate showed that passivity is lost at the same gain level regardless of the
     mance. The elegance that gives these methods their utility for   complexity of the structural dynamics [21].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
       236                                                                               IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 23, NO. 2, APRIL 2007


                                                            below all resonances to the highest frequencies where control
                                                               can impact impedance. When                     ,     is proportional
                                                                          to a discrete approximation of the shaded area in Fig. 4. The
                                                               proposed performance measure appears to be adequate for the
                                                                        applications we have investigated. However,  it could easily
                                                             be adapted or augmented to suit alternative applications and
                                                                systems without compromising the proposed design method.
                                                                    Indeed, any measure that can be modeled and changes with
                                                               performance is sufﬁcient, though the interpretation of results is
                                                                                facilitated if the cost measure is intuitively (e.g., monotonically)
                                                                          related to a physically meaningful quantity.
                                                          The computational design procedure takes the following
                                                                             steps.
                                                                       1) A parameterized robot model is assumed.
                                                                       2) A measure of stability is established, including a model of
                                                                            the environment, if necessary.
        Fig. 4.  Port impedance magnitude and phase for a lightly damped mass (target     3) A performance measure is deﬁned, including a vector of
        behavior) and a single-resonance system with large mass and damping. The        relevant frequencies.
       shaded region represents the error.                                      4) A form for the controller is assumed, with variable param-
                                                                                  eters     . For each parameter, a range of values is chosen.
                                                                       5) For every  possible combination of  control parameter
      the impedance of a two-mass, single-resonance system (as in
                                                                              values, stability is evaluated.
      Fig. 6) with large inertia (6 kg total) and damping (24 Ns/m
                                                                       6) If a parameter set is unstable, it is eliminated from further
        total). The dashed trace shows the impedance of a single, lightly
                                                                             consideration.
     damped mass (1 kg with 1 Ns/m damping), representing a target
                                                                       7) If a parameter set is stable, performance is evaluated and
      impedance. On the magnitude plot, the region between the two
                                                                                stored.
        is shaded to show the error. Below approximately 2 r/s, the dif-
                                                                       8) The stable combination of parameters that yields the lowest
      ference between the two curves results primarily from the differ-
                                                                             cost is selected as the best controller.
      ence in damping. At frequencies between 10 and 200 r/s, inertia
                                                                       9) If necessary, the resolution or range of controller parame-
      dominates, and the difference in offset is due to the difference
                                                                                      ters     is adjusted and the process is repeated.
       in apparent inertia. At higher frequencies, the resonance of the
                                                             Depending on the number of parameters varied, the results
     two-mass system is apparent. Beyond resonance, a controller
                                                               can be displayed in various ways to view trends due to changing
      can have little or no effect on the endpoint because its action is
                                                                 parameter values. If a single parameter    (e.g., a gain) is mono-
      attenuated by the intermediate dynamics. The phase plot shows
                                                                          tonically related to both stability and performance in the range
      the difference in the break frequencies of the systems at low
                                                                      of interest, a stability boundary can be located in the space of
      frequencies, and the resonance of the two-mass system around
                                                                              for each combination of the remaining parameters. This en-
     600 r/s. If the system is controlled to reduce apparent inertia and
                                                                      ables output in the form of one or more “design surfaces” that
     becomes nonpassive, the phase exceeds     close to resonance
                                                                                   illustrate the effects of shaping controller dynamics on perfor-
        (e.g., see Example 2), and the phase error increases, even as the
                                                             mance, and affords a deﬁnition of a gain-based stability margin.
      apparent friction and inertia are reduced. This is one reason that
                                        A practical example follows.
      phase is not generally useful as a performance measure.
                                                            Example 1: Loop Shaping for Passive Robot Control:  In
      An optimal controller would minimize the deviation from
                                                                                this example, force feedback is used to reduce the apparent
      the desired impedance over the relevant frequencies, the shaded
                                                            impedance of a single-DOF robot while maintaining passivity
      area in Fig. 4. A cost function that reﬂects this for a discrete
                                                                      of its interaction port. The controller is for a robot module
      vector of frequencies between   and     is
                                                                            (Fig. 5) used as a portion of a physical therapy robot [26].
                                                                    (4)  The module is backdrivable, but has substantially higher po-
                                                                      sition-dependent Coulomb friction (up to 20 N; target is 2 N)
      Practice dictates that a log-log scale provides the most useful  and inertia (6 kg; target is 1 kg) than desired. Force measured
      balance between high- and low-frequency magnitude com-  by a transducer at the handle of the robot is fed back such that
      ponents, so the frequency vector  is logspaced.        and   the motor is used to reduce the apparent endpoint impedance.
                 reﬂect the actual and target port impedance, respec-   Previous work used proportional force feedback on this robot
       tively, and are normalized by 1 Ns/m to render them unitless.   [26]; this example demonstrates the insights gained by the new
                 is a scalar weighting function of frequency valued  method and the performance improvement that results from
     between zero and unity, and is selected by the designer. The   shaping the controller dynamics.
      weighting function provides a means to emphasize certain   A linear robot model, depicted in Fig. 6, is used to facili-
      frequencies to customize a solution, for example, to reject a   tate the use of the necessary computational tools. A ﬁrst struc-
      resonance. Frequency bounds can also be selected to tailor a   tural resonant mode and linear damping are modeled; the sig-
       solution; here they are chosen to span from several decades   niﬁcant nonlinear Coulomb friction is left unmodeled. The port
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
     BUERGER AND HOGAN: COMPLEMENTARY STABILITY AND LOOP SHAPING FOR IMPROVED HUMAN–ROBOT INTERACTION                             237





                                                                                           Fig. 7.  Normalized cost at stability boundary versus pole and zero location.

        Fig. 5.  Screw-driven linear robot module.

                                                                          to improve understanding of the effects of speciﬁc controllers,
                                                                     as illustrated below.
                                         A controller with a single pole and a single zero is used


                                                                                                                                        (7)

                                                                 This controller has three adjustable parameters     : the zero
                                                                 frequency    , the pole frequency    , and the DC gain         .
        Fig. 6.  Single structural resonance robot model with force transducer dy-   In the region of interest,        is monotonically (though not
       namics. The actuator provides the force F  . The spring k and damper b
                                                                             linearly) related to performance and stability; for ﬁxed   and       represent the ﬁrst structural resonant mode, while the mass is split between m
      and m  , whose positions are measured by x  and x  , respectively. b  and b        , as      increases, performance improves while the system
       represent damping to ground. F  is the applied force due to interaction with the  becomes “less passive.” This controller form admits lead, lag,
       environment, while k  and b  represent the dynamics of the force transducer.
                                                            and proportional control, depending on the relative values of
                                                            and   , permitting the exploration of a range of different con-
                                                                                 trollers with relatively few parameters. Root frequencies were     impedance is determined by the dynamic ratio of the endpoint
                                                                          tested from 0.1 r/s, which is well below any signiﬁcant robot      force    to velocity    at the port
                                                               dynamics, to 10  r/s, which is above the dominant frequency of
                                                                       the structural dynamics; selection of parameter ranges required
                                                                    (5)                                                          no assumptions about the system other than knowledge of
                                                                       the resonant dynamics. To locate the stability boundary for
     Once the control law is applied to determine       , the port                                                               each combination of the values of   and   , the range of
     impedance can be derived from equations of motion; the com-                                                        was chosen to include both stable and unstable solutions. By
      plete port impedance as well as the numerical parameter values                                                                    exploring controllers of various shapes and parameters, this
     used for the example are provided in the Appendix.                                                               approach approximates loop-shaping design.
       For this example, the target impedance           is zero at all                                                                 For each set of parameters, the port impedance        is com-
      frequencies; this is equivalent to “pure” force control. This sim-                                                                      puted, with              , and evaluated along a vector of frequen-
      pliﬁes the controller, as only force feedback is needed; the ex-                                                                          cies encompassing all relevant dynamics to determine passivity
     ample is extended to nonzero impedance in [24]. Because the                                                                     of the interaction port. If the real part of the port impedance is
      log of zero cannot be computed, (4) must be adjusted for this                                                                         greater than zero at all frequencies
      special case and the alternative measure below is used

                                                                                                                                        (8)
                                                                    (6)
                                                                   then the port impedance is “positive real” and strictly passive
                                                                        (see [20]). If the real part of the port impedance is less than zero
     Performance is not weighted with frequency, so                   . A   at any frequency, the particular controller renders the system
      logarithmically spaced vector of frequencies ranging from 10     nonpassive, and therefore, this stability measure is not satis-
      to 10  r/s is used. Theoretically, this cost may be less than zero;   ﬁed; that is, there exist passive objects which will destabilize
     however, smaller costs are always preferred. This measure is   the robot upon contact.
     most useful for ranking candidates rather than as an intrinsically    The computational loop-shaping algorithm was used  to
     meaningful absolute measure. Impedance plots can be examined   search a range of values for    ,    , and         . The results are
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
       238                                                                               IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 23, NO. 2, APRIL 2007


                                                                                         IV. COMPLEMENTARY STABILITY

                                                          To further improve performance, it is necessary to relax pas-
                                                                               sivity and replace it with an alternative measure of interaction
                                                                                   stability. While human-interactive robots must accommodate an
                                                                      uncertain environment, the dynamic behavior of that environ-
                                                          ment (e.g., a human limb) is known to reside within speciﬁc
                                                                                limits. The dynamic properties of human arms, for instance,
                                                                  vary considerably between subjects and with muscle activation,
                                                                     but the variation is bounded. The apparent inertia at the hand
                                                                         varies from that of a small child to that of a large adult, but
                                                                                                        it is never zero and never exceeds a maximum (of several kg).
                                                                           Stiffness is similarly bounded and, perhaps most importantly,
                                                             an arm can never exhibit certain challenging behaviors such as
                                                                                 total physical constraint or extreme static friction. A substantial
                                                                                literature documents dynamic properties of human limbs (e.g.,
        Fig. 8. Lag compensator’s effect on robot port impedance.                 see [27] and [28]).
                                                  When passivity is used as a stability objective, the only as-
                                                              sumption made about the environment is that it, too, is passive.
      plotted on the design surface in Fig. 7, which shows the cost
                                                                 This is likely sufﬁcient to guarantee coupled stability with hu-
      with the maximum stable gain      for each combination of
                                                       mans (though, to date, it has not been conclusively proven that
      values for  and   . The cost is normalized such that any cost
                                                     human limbs are passive; see [29] for an argument for treating
       less than one reduces apparent impedance; where the cost is
                                                          them as such). However, given the properties of human arms
      lower, performance is better. On the diagonal            , the pole
                                                                    described above, passivity is unnecessarily restrictive. Our ex-
     and zero cancel out, yielding proportional control. Performance
                                                                    perience has shown that some controllers that are known to be
        is best when low-frequency lag compensation is used, with
                                                                  nonpassive are adequately stable in clinical rehabilitation tasks
      a very low-frequency pole and a higher frequency zero. The
                                                                            [26]. The better deﬁned the conditions for stability, the less con-
      placement of the zero has a strong effect on performance. The
                                                                         servative controllers can be made, providing latitude to design
      algorithm dictates that a zero around 6 r/s is optimal (with a
                                                                           for better performance. We introduce a new way to deﬁne cou-
      normalized cost of 0.72), a far-from-obvious result. The plot in
                                                                   pled stability, and use it with the loop-shaping method to im-
      Fig. 7 shows that performance continues to improve as the pole
                                                                prove performance.
        is moved to the lowest tested frequency. Indeed, further testing
                                         A controlled robot should be complementary to the environ-
     conﬁrmed that the best performance was obtained when the
                                                             ments with which it is designed to interact; that is, it must in-
      pole was moved all the way to zero [       in (7)], turning the
                                                                              teract stably with these environments. A controller should pro-
      lag compensator into a PI controller; at this extreme, the cost
                                                                   vide for this while maximizing performance. We propose the
     was 0.63 [24]. Because performance is best with a zero at 6 r/s,
                                                               term complementary stability to describe the stability target for
      PI control is superior to pure I control. In this case, the lead
                                                                          interacting machines, where the details of stability are deter-
      region, where           , shows little promise.
                                                          mined by the expected environment(s). Because the dynamics of
         Fig. 8 shows the port impedance magnitude and phase under
                                                                 a particular human limb are almost impossible to know exactly
      the lag controller speciﬁed by the loop-shaping algorithm, along
                                                                                at a given time, an exact model cannot be used for human-in-
      with the uncontrolled impedance. Also plotted is a proportional
                                                                            teractive robots. However, because all human arms are dynam-
       controller with a loop gain of one, which provides a 50% reduc-
                                                                              ically similar, the environment can be represented in terms of a
       tion in apparent inertia, the limiting value for passivity. The lag
                                                              nominal port function      and some bounded deviation from
       controller is particularly effective at reducing the low-frequency
                                                                                this nominal
      impedance, where friction dominates. The phase stays between
           and          , conﬁrming that the interaction port behavior is
                                                                                                                                        (9)      passive. The apparent inertia at the stability boundary is approx-
      imately 3 kg (half the physical value, as expected at the limit for
                                                                   deﬁnes the possible deviation from the nominal, and is       passivity).
                                                                        subject to a bound on its magnitude, e.g., in the inﬁnity norm       The  controller boosts  the compensation where  possible
      without compromising passivity, while limiting feedback in the
      frequency range where it is most destabilizing. The algorithm                                                           (10)
      provides a nonobvious frequency-domain “shape”  for  the
       controller (through the placement of the control zero) in spite           is a weighting function that shapes the range of possible
      of the nonlinear relationship between the controller dynamics   deviation with frequency. Equation (9) deﬁnes a set of dynamic
     and port impedance. Note that the effect of the controller on   behaviors that includes all expected environments.      and
      the impedance magnitude and phase are not obvious by inspec-         are chosen based on data or models. The additive pertur-
       tion or by applying classical tools, so the numerical method   bation is presented as a representative example, but multiplica-
       facilitates the design process.                                        tive or feedback structures could also be used.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
     BUERGER AND HOGAN: COMPLEMENTARY STABILITY AND LOOP SHAPING FOR IMPROVED HUMAN–ROBOT INTERACTION                             239





        Fig. 9.  Block diagram of a robot interacting with an uncertain environment.





                                                                                           Fig. 11.  Block diagram of robot system interacting with perturbed environ-
                                                                                ment. Expression for M is provided in the Appendix.



        Fig. 10.  Second-order environment model.                               uncertainties are used here for their intuitive relationship to
                                                                     physical quantities, the use of the small gain theorem permits a
                                                           wide range of alternative expressions of uncertainty, including
          If the environment is deﬁned by (9), the coupled system can  unmodeled dynamics and representations derived from exper-
     be represented by the block diagram in Fig. 9, which provides   imental data.
      the means to evaluate complementary stability for this system.     The environment model characterized by Fig. 10 and (11) is
                                                           most easily represented as an impedance with three perturbation          Deﬁnition: A robot with port impedance function   sat-
                                                                      terms. Because the robot impedance is linear and nonzero, it can        isﬁes the complementary stability condition with a set of
                                                             be inverted and represented as an admittance. A block diagram        environments deﬁned by (9) if the model in Fig. 9 is ro-
                                                                     of the perturbed system is shown in the left panel of Fig. 11,        bustly stable for any       satisfying (10).
                                                            and is equivalent to the system shown in the right panel (    is
     This deﬁnition translates coupled stability into a robust stability   given in the Appendix). In the latter representation, the robust
     problem, which can be solved by application of the small gain   stability of the system can be determined by the application of
     theorem [30]. Robust stability is equivalent to stability of the   the small gain theorem with the structured singular value [30].
      robot when coupled to all environments that it is expected to en-   In this case, the perturbation matrix is diagonal and real-valued;
      counter; exactly the stability condition needed. If this condition   the structured singular value for this case has no closed-form
      allows it, nonpassive controllers are permitted; this can improve   solution and can be computationally burdensome, but it yields a
     performance, as shown below.                                 necessary and sufﬁcient condition for coupled stability with all
       Example 2: Using Limited Knowledge of Human Dynamics:   environments in the set described by (11). For each combination
     Example 1 is repeated with complementary stability replacing   of controller values, the algorithm tests stability by computing
      passivity as the stability measure. The robot model remains as   the appropriate structured singular value    for    over a set
      in Fig. 6, and the control law (7) is used along with the perfor-   of frequencies where the robot impedance is nonpassive (and
     mance cost (6). This enables direct comparison of the passive   therefore coupled stability is at risk); when           , contact with
     and nonpassive designs.                                some environment in the set drives the interface unstable, and
       Complementary stability requires a representation of the en-   the controller is disallowed. For stable solutions, (6) is evaluated
      vironment. Here, a second-order model (shown in Fig. 10) is   to compare performance.
      chosen, capturing inertial          , stiffness        , and dissipative      Fig. 12 shows the results of the loop-shaping algorithm using
            characteristics, all of which are important parts of human   complementary stability. This plot shows the cost (normalized
     arm dynamics. Recent work suggests that actual arm endpoint   as in Fig. 7) with the maximum gain      that meets the com-
      characteristics are close to second-order [27], [28], [31]. Each   plementary stability requirement for each combination of values
     parameter is deﬁned by a nominal value               and a   for  and   . As in Example 1, performance is best when low-fre-
    maximum deviation from that value                          , such that   quency lag compensation is used (marked    in Fig. 12); the
                                                                normalized cost is 0.50 for the limiting plotted value (again, the
                                                               extreme case of PI control offers a small additional improve-
                                                          ment [24]). A lead controller at high frequencies (labeled    in
                                                              (11)                                                                         Fig. 12) is almost as effective at lowering cost. The best per-
           is a real number between  1 and   1; when stability is   formance in this region has a normalized cost of 0.59, when
     achieved for all values in this range, then it is guaranteed for all          and    730 r/s. The design algorithm identiﬁes two
      permitted values of            , and     . The values of the parame-   distinct (and nonintuitive) control forms that each substantially
       ters in (11) were determined from the literature [27], [28], [31],   improve performance; both offer signiﬁcant improvement over
      are given in the Appendix, and include behaviors ranging from   passive control.
      primarily inertial to primarily elastic and primarily dissipative,    The impedance plots in Fig. 13 contrast the controllers.
      as well as combinations of these behaviors. While parametric  The best proportional, lag, and lead controllers selected by
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
       240                                                                               IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 23, NO. 2, APRIL 2007





                                                                                           Fig. 14.  Examples of stable and unstable trajectories from impact tests.
        Fig. 12.  Normalized cost at stability boundary versus pole and zero frequency.

                                                                 a higher gain value across all frequencies. The nonintuitive
                                                                      nature of this controller’s effect underscores the need for a
                                                          method like the one described here. The lag and lead controllers
                                                                       are separated by almost two decades in frequency, and can be
                                                           combined into a lag-lead controller to reap the beneﬁts of both
                                                                            [24].
                                                          Compared with Example 1, the new stability measure reduces
                                                                       the minimum cost from 0.72 to 0.50. Loop shaping improves
                                                                  performance, and complementary stability parlays knowledge
                                                                      of the environment into further performance gains. The latter
                                                                              result is robust to realistic environmental uncertainty; an exact
                                                          model is not required to reap beneﬁts. Though not demonstrated
                                                                         here, this approach also provides a means of controller design
                                                     when the environment may be nonpassive.

                                                                     V. IMPLEMENTATION AND COMPARISON WITH ALTERNATIVES

                                                          The controller from Example 2 was tested on the robot
        Fig. 13.  Port impedance magnitude and phase under no control, proportional,  module in Fig. 5 using a PC-based control system (QNX O/S,
         lag, and lead control.                                       1000 samples/s). Because of bandwidth limitations in the force
                                                              measurement, high-frequency lead compensation could not
                                                             be implemented as designed. A lag compensator with a break
      the method are shown along with the uncontrolled system   frequency of 6 r/s (selected by the design method) was tested.
      impedance.                                            The coupled stability properties of the system were tested by
        All three controllers are nonpassive, as evidenced by the   contact with springs, a hard plastic block, and human arms. Stiff
      phase exceeding      in the frequency range of the structural   springs are usually the most destabilizing environment for sys-
     dynamic behavior (around 10   r/s), but they ensure coupled   tems that use force feedback [20]. A “contact test” and an “im-
       stability speciﬁcally because knowledge of the environment has   pact test” were performed with six different springs with stiff-
     been used for design. The magnitude plot shows that the lag   ness ranging from 260 to 57 000 N/m, and with the plastic block,
     and lead controllers provide very different beneﬁts compared   with stiffness of approximately 10 N/m. In the contact test, the
      with proportional control: the former primarily boosts the gain   robot handle was brought by hand into resting contact with the
       at low frequencies to offset friction, while the latter reduces   spring and released. If oscillations grew, this test was judged un-
      the impedance (inertia as well as friction) more equally at all   stable. The more challenging impact test required that the robot
      frequencies. The difference can be understood by considering    fall a short distance (1–2 cm) to contact the environment and
      the phase plot. The lag compensator takes effect at low frequen-   withstand the impact. If oscillations abated and the system set-
       cies, but the zero and gain are placed such that the phase stays   tled to rest, this test was judged stable, while if oscillations grew,
     below      until close to the structural resonance, where it then    it was judged unstable. Fig. 14 shows examples of stable and
      tracks the phase of the system with proportional control. The   unstable impact tests. Finally, each controller was tested by vig-
      lead compensator creates a substantial dip in phase just below   orous grasp with a human arm: a handle on the robot module
      resonance, reducing the destabilizing phase and permitting  was gripped tightly and the arm and hand muscles co-contracted
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
     BUERGER AND HOGAN: COMPLEMENTARY STABILITY AND LOOP SHAPING FOR IMPROVED HUMAN–ROBOT INTERACTION                             241



                                                     TABLE I
                                       COUPLED STABILITY PREDICTIONS AND TEST RESULTS, LAG CONTROL





                                                                    robot module. These curves were produced by slowly moving
                                                                       the robot by hand against the controllers. The uncompensated
                                                                      (dash-dot) curve shows the virtual stiffness implemented with
                                                                      proportional position feedback alone, and thus reﬂects  all
                                                                    position-dependent friction intrinsic to the hardware. Coulomb
                                                                              friction appears as the vertical segments of the curve, which
                                                                 occur when starting, stopping, or when direction is reversed.
                                                           With the new compensator (dashed line), the low-frequency
                                                                  behavior tracks the desired curve very closely. The Coulomb
                                                                              friction is reduced from 10–20 N to less than 0.5 N, a reduction
                                                                     of at least 95%. Inertia, tested by initial condition response
                                                                       against a virtual spring of known stiffness, is just 1.2 kg when
                                                                                                                                         , representing a reduction of approximately 80%
                                                           from the physical value (6 kg) and 60% from the theoretically
                                                                        best passive controller (3 kg). This impedance reduction is
                                                                   impressive in its own right, but even more so when considered
                                                                          in light of the robust stability properties of this system. With
        Fig. 15.  Virtual spring implemented with controller with no force feedback, lag
                                                                   apparent friction reduced by 95% and inertia by 80%, the        controller, and natural admittance controller. The direction of travel is shown by
       the arrows on the uncompensated system curve.                        system reliably remains stable despite a substantial impact with
                                                                       the plastic block; a difﬁcult task for any stiff robot, particularly
                                                            one using force feedback.
     maximally. The subject varied arm geometry and effort level to     In all cases, the model is more conservative than the test; that
       test as wide a range of stiffness, damping, and inertia as possible.    is, the model predicts instability for cases where the test system
       If any vibration or oscillation could be induced, the controller   remains stable. This may result from the fact that the system’s
     was marked as failing this test.                          Coulomb friction, potentially a large energy sink, is unmodeled.
        Table  I shows composite  results from coupled  stability   This suggests that progress can in some cases be made using
       testing, for the lag compensator with several different DC gain   simpliﬁed, linear models, even when robot behavior is signiﬁ-
     parameter values. The columns marked with stiffness values   cantly nonlinear, and serves as an encouraging endorsement of
     only show the maximum stable spring stiffness for each gain   this approach. While an exact model may be preferred, a sim-
      level tested (separated by rows), as well as the maximum stable   pliﬁed linear model permits the use of a vastly greater suite of
       stiffness predicted by the design model. The next two columns   analytical tools and is often more realistically attainable on real
     show the results of testing with the plastic block and the human   hardware.
     arm; “  ” indicates a stable coupling and “  ” indicates insta-    The controller described above was compared with NAC, the
       bility. In the “block” column, the left mark is for the contact   current “best practice” for interaction control [22]. The NAC
       test and the right for the impact test. The design set, which   structure uses both motion and force feedback; target dynamic
      includes only the lowest spring stiffness, is also highlighted.   properties are speciﬁed, the interaction force is measured, and
     The controller proves quite robustly stable under these test   the motion feedback controller is used to servo the system to the
      conditions; in fact, only the highest gain level tested produced   response speciﬁed by a target admittance. To design a NAC, the
     any problem interacting with human arms. The system has  module in Fig. 5 is modeled as a damped mass. The controller
     even better stability properties than predicted, enabling better   uses both motion and endpoint force feedback
     performance through a higher DC gain.
      As predicted, the lag controller is particularly effective at                                                           (12)
      rejecting friction, thanks to its high gain at low frequencies.
     This can be seen in Fig. 15, which shows the force versus      is the velocity of the mass, and   and   are again the actuator
     displacement curve for a virtual spring implemented on the  and interaction force, respectively.    and     are controller
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
       242                                                                               IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 23, NO. 2, APRIL 2007


                           TABLE II                              lag controller proved to be more robust to interaction with the
            COUPLED STABILITY PREDICTIONS AND TEST RESULTS, NAC           target environment.


                                                                                       VI. CONCLUSIONS

                                                                     Despite decades of effort, interaction control remains a chal-
                                                                    lenging problem, and the design of interaction controllers lacks
                                                                       the uniﬁed, effective approach enjoyed in servo design. We be-
                                                                            lieve that this results, at least in part, from the underappreci-
                                                                      ated structural differences between the two problems, and the
                                                                  continued attempts to apply servo design techniques to inter-
                                                                       acting systems. The approach described here seeks to bridge the
                                                            gap between the two control problems; the design “surfaces” of
                                                                         Figs. 7 and 12 are the output of this method, and provide an
                                                                approximate equivalent to the insight available intuitively from
                                                                   servo loop shaping. The examples show that, not surprisingly,
                                                                        there are signiﬁcant beneﬁts to be gained from shaping the dy-
                                                             namics of feedback controllers, and also that greater beneﬁts can
                                                             be achieved by relaxing passivity.
                                                          The examples presented here used a primitive optimization
       transfer functions. To derive the controller, the port admittance
                                                                      technique. Advanced tools could almost certainly improve ef-
      of the system, with (12) applied as the control law, is derived and
                                                                    ﬁciency. Nevertheless, displaying the entire parameter space to
       set equal to a desired admittance function with stiffness        ,
                                                                    see trends (as in Figs. 7 and 12) rather than ﬁnding only one
     damping        , and mass
                                                                   best-performing solution provides valuable insight.
                                                          To date, the method has been applied to single-DOF systems,
                                                               (13)  where it has paid immediate dividends for actuator control. Ex-
                                                                      tension to multiple-DOF robots would be useful; however, it is
      Proportional velocity feedback is used so that                  , and   importantnottounderstatethevalue ofthe single-DOF case.The
      the compensator for force feedback can be derived from (13).  most signiﬁcant limitation in the development of more advanced
      For passivity, [22] recommends selecting       at no less than   interactive robots comes from the drive system; achieving both
                       . While NAC was introduced as a means of providing   high force density and low mechanical impedance is a persistent,
       passivity, it can be used to make nonpassive controllers with   vexing problem [24]. Single-DOF control methods that can sig-
       better performance if the target mass is further reduced [32].     niﬁcantly improve actuators will enable a signiﬁcant technolog-
     NAC was implemented with a range of target parameters,   ical advance and facilitate increased implementation of interac-
     and stability and performance experiments were repeated. A   tiverobots.Applicationtomulti-DOFrobotsrepresentsanimpor-
     sample of the results is shown for        2 kg and variable   tant area for continued study. Although extension is nontrivial, at
            in Table II, which uses the same form as Table I. In gen-   least two different approaches show promise. One option is to
       eral, the stability properties of nonpassive controllers designed   place force sensors on each actuator and design controllers with
      with the NAC method were inferior to those that employed lag   an adapted version of the method presented here. The principal
      force-feedback control. Only when the target inertia     was   challenge is that the “environment” with which each actuator in-
       set at 6 kg (i.e., no reduction of apparent inertia) and the target   teracts could vary with robot conﬁguration. For this reason, this
     damping at 50 Ns/m was the NAC-controlled module as stable   approach may be particularly fruitful for robots that typically op-
       in contacting all three types of environments (springs, block,   erate in only a small fraction of their total conﬁguration space
     and arm) as the lag controller with                      . In this case,    (e.g., MIT-MANUS [1]), such that changes in dynamics with
      however, the extremely high viscous friction and inertia make   conﬁguration are minimal. A second approach would use end-
      performance far inferior. Complete results are in [24].            point force feedback and shape force compensation directly at
     NAC is relatively effective in making the system exhibit   the robot level. This approach should be feasible, but will require
      a linear dynamic response, because servoing along an actual   addressing several issues, including modeling the primary robot
       linear system trajectory is a speciﬁc objective. However, be-   resonances (which are likely to depend on conﬁguration) and
      cause velocity is fed back rather than position, it is subject to   deﬁningperformanceatamulti-DOFinteractionport[33].Either
      accumulated errors in implementing desired stiffness, causing   approachmightbeneﬁtfromagain-schedulingcontrollerthatad-
      a drift phenomenon. A hand-actuated force-position curve is   justs the dynamics of force compensation with conﬁguration.
     shown in Fig. 15 for comparison with the other controllers.
     The lag controller’s use of low-frequency gain (approximating                                                                             APPENDIX
       integral  action) makes endpoint behavior more noticeably
      nonlinear than with NAC, but it effectively suppresses friction       If the generic control law
      nonetheless, and creates a very accurate virtual spring. Both
       controllers have performance strengths, but in this case, the                                                      (A-1)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
     BUERGER AND HOGAN: COMPLEMENTARY STABILITY AND LOOP SHAPING FOR IMPROVED HUMAN–ROBOT INTERACTION                             243



                          TABLE III                                           [7]  J. Wheeler, “An ankle robot for a modular gait rehabilitation system,”
           PARAMETER VALUES FOR ROBOT AND ENVIRONMENT MODELS           SM thesis, Dept. Mech. Eng., MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2004.
                                                                                                 [8]  J. S. Wilson, Ed., Sensor Technology Handbook.  Boston, MA:
                                                                                Newnes, 2005.
                                                                                                 [9] G. E. Moore, “Cramming more components onto integrated circuits,”
                                                                                                    Electronics, vol. 38, pp. 114–117, 1965.
                                                                                          [10] N. Hogan and S. P. Buerger, “Impedance and interaction control,” in
                                                                                          Robotics and Automation Handbook, T. Kurfess, Ed.  Boca Raton,
                                                                                  FL: CRC, 2005.
                                                                                          [11] D. Whitney, “Force feedback control of manipulator ﬁne motions,”
                                                              ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control, vol. 99, pp. 91–97, 1977.
                                                                                          [12] S. D. Eppinger and W. P. Seering, “Three dynamic problems in robot
                                                                                                force control,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 751–758,
                                                                                     Dec. 1992.
                                                                                          [13] R. Volpe and P. Khosla, “A theoretical and experimental investiga-
     where           ,           , and        are controller transfer func-                                                                                                      tion of explicit force control strategies for manipulators,” IEEE Trans.
       tions, is applied to the model in Fig. 6, the impedance of the           Autom. Control, vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 1634–1650, Nov. 1993.
     system upstream of the force sensor dynamics         is the fol-       [14]  J. T. Wen and S. Murphy, “Stability analysis of position and force con-
      lowing:                                                                                              trol for robot arms,” IEEE Trans Autom. Control, vol. 36, no. 3, pp.
                                                                                    365–369, Mar. 1991.
                                                                                          [15] B. Siciliano and L. Villani, Robot Force Control.  Norwell, MA:
                                                                                      Kluwer, 1999.
                                                                                          [16] H. P. Qian and J. DeSchutter, “Introducing active linear and nonlinear
                                                                               damping to enable stable high gain force control in case of  stiff
                                                                                                     contact,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 1992, vol. 2, pp.
                                                                                   1374–1379.
                                                                                          [17]  J. DeSchutter, H. Bruyninckx, W. Zhu, and M. W. Spong, “Force con-
                                                                                                                       trol: A bird’s eye view,” in Control Problems in Robotics and Automa-
                                                                                                         tion: Future Directions.  San Diego, CA: Springer-Verlag, 1997, pp.
                                                                                        1–17.
                                                                                          [18] N. Hogan, “Impedance control: An approach to manipulation,” ASME
                                                                                                                  J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control, vol. 107, pp. 1–24, 1985.
                                                                                          [19] ——, “On the stability of manipulators performing contact tasks,”
                                                                         IEEE J. Robot. Autom., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 677–686, Dec. 1988.
                                                         (A-2)                                                                                          [20]  J. E. Colgate and N. Hogan, “Robust control of dynamically interacting
    When the force transducer dynamics are included, the robot port            systems,” Int. J. Control, vol. 48, pp. 65–88, 1988.
                                                                                          [21] ——, “An analysis of contact instability in terms of passive physical
     impedance becomes                                                                                                    equivalents,” in Proc. IEEE  Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 1989, pp.
                                                                                    404–409.
                                                                                          [22] W. S. Newman, “Stability and performance limits of interaction con-
                                                         (A-3)              trollers,” ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control, vol. 114, pp. 563–570,
                                                                                        1992.
                                                                                          [23] G. F. Franklin, J. D. Powell, and A. Emami-Naeini, Feedback Control
     The port impedance with a particular controller such as (7) can             of Dynamic Systems.  New York: Addison-Wesley, 1994.
     be determined by substituting into these equations. If the envi-       [24] S. P. Buerger, “Stable, high-force, low-impedance robotic actuators
                                                                                                      for human-interactive machines,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Mech. Eng.,
     ronment is as shown in Fig. 10 and described by (11), then the          MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2005.
      expression for    in Fig. 11 is                                              [25] F. T. Brown, Engineering System Dynamics.  New York: Marcel
                                                                                        Dekker, 2001.
                                                                                          [26] S. P. Buerger, H. I. Krebs, and N. Hogan, “Characterization and control
                                                                                               of a screw-driven robot for neurorehabilitation,” in Proc. IEEE CCA/
                                                         (A-4)
                                                                                               ISIC, 2001, pp. 388–394.
                                                                                          [27]  J. M. Dolan, M. B. Friedman, and M. L. Nagurka, “Dynamic and loaded
                                                                                  impedance components in the maintenance of human arm posture,”
     Parameter values for both examples are provided in Table III.           IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 698–709, May/Jun.
                                                                                        1993.
                        REFERENCES                                     [28] T. Tsuji, P. G. Morasso, K. Goto, and K. Ito, “Human hand impedance
                                                                                                        characteristics during maintained posture,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 72, pp.
            [1] H. I. Krebs, N. Hogan, M. L. Aisen, and B. T. Volpe, “Robot-aided           475–485, 1995.
                 neurorehabilitation,” IEEE Trans. Rehab. Eng., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 75–87,       [29] N. Hogan, “Controlling impedance at the man/machine interface,” in
                Jan. 1998.                                                                   Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 1989, pp. 1626–1631.
            [2] S. D. Fasoli, H. I. Krebs, J. Stein, W. R. Frontera, and N. Hogan, “Ef-                                                                                          [30] R. S. Sanchez-Pena and M. Sznaier, Robust Systems Theory and Ap-
                 fects of robotic therapy on motor impairment and recovery in chronic                                                                                                        plications.  New York: Wiley, 1998.
                 stroke,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehab., vol. 84, pp. 477–482, 2003.
                                                                                          [31]  J. Palazzolo, “Robotic technology to aid and assess recovery and
            [3] R. B. Gillespie, “Haptic interface to virtual environments,” in Robotics
                                                                                                learning in stroke patients,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Mech. Eng.,             and Automation Handbook, T. Kurfess, Ed.  Boca Raton, FL: CRC,
                                                                               MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2005.              2005.
            [4] D. A. Lawrence, “Stability and transparency in bilateral teleoperation,”       [32] M. Dohring and W. S. Newman, “Admittance enhancement in force
            IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 624–637, Oct. 1993.               feedback of dynamic systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
            [5] W. T. Townsend and J. A. Guertin, “Teleoperator slave—WAM design           2002, pp. 638–643.
              methodology,” Ind. Robot., vol. 26, p. 167, 1999.                           [33] E. D. Fasse and J. F. Broenink, “A spatial impedance controller for
            [6] M. Roberts, “A robot for gait rehabilitation,” SM thesis, Dept. Mech.            robotic manipulation,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 13, no. 4, pp.
               Eng., MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2004.                                        546–556, Aug. 1997.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
       244                                                                               IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 23, NO. 2, APRIL 2007



                            Stephen P. Buerger was born in Columbus, OH. He                             Neville Hogan was born in Dublin, Ireland. He re-
                                 received the Bachelor of Mechanical Engineering de-                            ceived the Dip. Eng. (with distinction) from Dublin
                                gree from the University of Dayton, Dayton, OH, in                           College of Technology, Dublin, Ireland, and the M.S.,
                              1999, and the S.M. and Ph.D. degrees in 2001 and                           M.E., and Ph.D. degrees from the Massachusetts In-
                              2005, respectively, from the Massachusetts Institute                                  stitute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge.
                                 of Technology (MIT), Cambridge.                                                  Currently, he is a Professor of Mechanical Engi-
                                Following a term as a Postdoctoral Associate                              neering, Professor of Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
                                      at the Newman Laboratory for Biomechanics and                         and Director of the Newman Laboratory for Biome-
                       Human Rehabilitation, MIT, he joined the Intelligent                            chanics and Human Rehabilitation at MIT. Following
                               Systems, Robotics and Cybernetics Group, Sandia                                industrial experience in engineering design, he joined
                                National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM, where he                       MIT’s School of Engineering faculty in 1979 and has
          is currently a Senior Member of the Technical Staff. His research interests   served as Head and Associate Head of the Mechanical Engineering Depart-
        include human–machine interaction, actuator design, and the application of   ment’s System Dynamics and Control division.
        these ﬁelds to robotics and medical technology.                                  Dr. Hogan’s awards include an Honorary Doctorate from the Delft University
                                                                                       of Technology; the Silver Medal of the Royal Academy of Medicine in Ireland;
                                                                           and an Honorary Doctorate from the Dublin Institute of Technology.





Authorized licensed use limited to: Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Downloaded on August 13,2026 at 07:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.