=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
                                                                                                                                                            1

         Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning for
            Contact-Rich Manipulation Tasks

                        Noah Geiger, Tamim Asfour, Neville Hogan and Johannes Lachner





          Abstract—Learning-based methods excel at robot motion gen-     Robots operating in contact-rich and unstructured environ-
         eration but remain limited in contact-rich physical interaction.   ments must bridge these two domains: desired motions must
       Impedance control provides stable and safe contact behavior but                                                               be inferred and represented in the information domain, yet
         requires task-specific tuning of stiffness and damping parameters.
                                                                    executed through control algorithms that take into account      We present Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning, a framework
         that bridges these paradigms by combining generative modeling   energy exchange with the environment. This requirement is
        with energy-consistent impedance control. A Transformer-based   critical in assembly, robot-assisted rehabilitation, and other
         Diffusion Model, conditioned via cross-attention on measured ex-   contact-rich tasks where visual feedback may be limited and
         ternal wrenches, reconstructs simulated Zero-Force Trajectories                                                                          task success depends on regulating physical interaction rather
        (sZFTs) that represent contact-consistent equilibrium behavior.
                                                                     than simply following a path.     A SLERP-based quaternion noise scheduler preserves geometric
         consistency for rotations on the unit sphere. The reconstructed    The relation between motion planning (information domain)
       sZFT is used by an energy-based estimator to adapt impedance  and physical interaction (energy domain) is well described by
         online through directional stiffness and damping modulation.   mechanical impedance [5]–[7]. Impedance Control has been2026        Trained on parkour and robot-assisted therapy demonstrations                                                                  widely adopted to guarantee stability [5] and safety [4] for
         collected via Apple Vision Pro teleoperation, the model achieves
                                                                        robots that go in and out of contact. The separation of both        sub-millimeter  positional and sub-degree  rotational accuracy
        using only tens  of thousands  of samples. Deployed  in  real-  domains can be formalized by equivalent networks, a gen-Aug        time torque  control on a KUKA LBR  iiwa,  the approach   eralization of the equivalent-circuit concept [8], to represent
11  enablesachievingsmooth100%obstaclesuccess traversalin multi-geometryand generalizespeg-in-holeto unseeninsertion.tasks,   nonlinear dynamics and arbitrarily complex physical networks                                                                        as a combination of primitives [9]–[11].
       The code for all experiments is publicly available on GitHub and
                                                               While Impedance Control provides a powerful framework         videos of the experiments are available on the project website.
                                                                             for shaping robot–environment interaction [9], its effectiveness
          Index Terms—Imitation learning, Diffusion Models, Physical                                                                                    critically depends on the choice of stiffness and damping pa-
         interaction, Impedance Control
                                                                     rameters [12]. Too much stiffness can lead to jamming, while
                                                                      too little can prevent task execution. Selecting these parameters[cs.RO]                                                                                 is typically an iterative and time-consuming process, as current                                      I. INTRODUCTION
                                                                     physics-based simulation tools are not yet sufficiently accurate
          Robotic behavior arises from the interaction of two funda-   or reliable to support fully offline tuning [13].
        mentally different domains. On the one hand, motion planning     Recent advances in contact-rich manipulation can be di-
       and learning algorithms are based on data processing and   vided into three main strands: 1) model-based approaches,
        operate on symbolic or numerical representations of virtual   2) statistical-impedance heuristics, and 3) learning-based ap-
        desired behavior, such as trajectories, poses, or task objectives.   proaches.
       These representations are processed unidirectionally and are     Model-based approaches incorporate explicit contact dy-
        constrained only by temporal causality (“no output before in-   namics including friction cones, complementarity constraints,
        put”) and boundedness. They are not subject to physical laws.  and mixed-integer  formulations  [14]–[27]. These methods
        In this paper, we refer to this as the information domain [1].   produce behavior consistent with physical contact but face
          Physical interaction with the environment, on the other   challenges: high computational cost, parameter sensitivity, and
        hand, is governed by bidirectional behavior. It is constrained   limited robustness in unstructured settings. Most approaches
       by physical laws like energy conservation, entropy production,   require task-specific tuning of parameters. The selected con-
         gravity,  etc. In  this paper, we refer to  this as the energy   trol gains typically do not generalize across environmentsarXiv:2509.19696v4
       domain  [1]. Ignoring these physical constraints will yield  and tasks. Consequently, these approaches are not ideal for
        robot control problems with stability (passivity) [2], [3] and   unstructured environments with unknown contact dynamics.
         safety [4].                                               These limitations motivate the development of learning-based
                                                               frameworks capable of inferring and adapting stiffness online
           N. Geiger and T. Asfour are with the Institute for Anthropomatics and  from observed interaction data.
          Robotics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany; e-mail:
          noah.geiger@student.kit.edu, asfour@kit.edu                          Between explicit physics-based models and fully learning-
           N. Geiger, N. Hogan, and J. Lachner are with the Department of Mechanical   based policies, a class of statistical-impedance heuristics have
          Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA; N.  emerged within  the learning-from-demonstration  literature.
         Hogan, and  J. Lachner are also with the and Department of Brain and
          Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA;   These approaches typically model demonstrated motions using
           e-mail: ngeiger@mit.edu, neville@mit.edu, jlachner@mit.edu                probabilistic representations such as Gaussian Mixture Mod-

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
                                                                                                                                                  2


els, where the mean trajectory defines the nominal motion and   force sensing, and compliant kinesthetic teaching to directly
the covariance is interpreted as a measure of task relevance or   predict compliance-related  quantities  for a  low-level con-
confidence [28], [29]. Impedance parameters are then mod-    troller. In contrast, our approach operates solely on robot
ulated heuristically based on this statistical variability, with   kinematics and measured interaction wrenches, reconstructing
higher stiffness assigned to directions of low variance. These   a contact-consistent equilibrium trajectory from teleoperated
approaches have shown to be effective for structured tasks   demonstrations and deriving impedance adaptation through
with consistent geometry. However, these methods are  still   an energy-based estimator. Conceptually, both ACP’s Virtual
limited in contact-rich settings where changing environmental   Target Pose and the proposed equilibrium reconstruction rep-
constraints are not reflected in the statistical variability of the   resent interaction-conditioned equilibria. However, the former
demonstrations.                                                            is directly tracked as a force-generating target, whereas the
  Learning-based approaches,  in  contrast,  primarily  oper-    latter serves as an intermediate representation for estimating
ate in the information domain. Reinforcement learning and  impedance adaptation while the robot continues to follow its
sampling-based optimization methods [30]–[35] can achieve   nominal motion reference.
context-aware behavior, but typically lack an explicit represen-     In this way, our approach bridges data-driven learning and
tation of impedance, which prescribes a bidirectional relation-   energy-consistent control: Diffusion Models explain physi-
ship between motion and generalized force [36]. Instead, these   cal interaction by reconstructing contact-consistent equilib-
methods rely on reward functions that penalize either force or    ria, while impedance control enforces stability and physical
position deviations. As a result, they tend to converge toward   consistency during execution. Our method operates purely on
admittance-like behaviors that suppress interaction forces or   robot kinematics and measured interaction wrenches, without
motion deviations, rather than explicitly regulating impedance.   relying on visual observations.
  More recent generative approaches, including diffusion poli-  We validated the framework on a KUKA LBR iiwa in two
cies [37], flow-matching policies [38], [39], and Transformer-   contact-rich scenarios: parkour-style obstacle  traversal and
based policy models [40], [41], have demonstrated impressive   multi-geometry peg-in-hole insertion. Training data were col-
performance in motion generation across tasks and embod-   lected through teleoperation using Apple Vision Pro (AVP)
iments  [42]. However,  these methods  primarily focus on   equipped with a markerless pose-tracking framework [44]
trajectory generation and are typically executed through PD   integrated into the robot controller. Both tasks expose the
controllers with fixed proportional and derivative gains to   limitations of fixed impedance and simple adaptation schemes,
maintain stability during contact. Compliance in such systems  which require careful, task-specific parameter tuning and still
is therefore not explicitly controlled but emerges indirectly   tend to jam at obstacles or fail to achieve insertion. In con-
through low control gains. While this strategy can prevent    trast, Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning achieves consistent
hardware damage,  it provides limited control over physical   success without manual retuning.
interaction behavior in contact-rich or safety-critical scenarios     This result  is particularly noteworthy in the peg-in-hole
where deliberate impedance modulation is essential.            experiments, as the Diffusion Model was not trained on this
  This paper addresses this gap by formulating impedance   task. Despite the absence of peg-in-hole demonstrations during
adaptation as an equilibrium reconstruction problem rather   training, the system achieved a 100% success  rate across
than a trajectory learning problem. We present Diffusion-Based    all peg geometries. This generalization was obtained using
Impedance Learning, a framework that integrates generative   only 1.6 hours of teleoperated training data (72,000 samples).
modeling with energy-consistent impedance control. While  The  results summarized in Table  I underscore the central
the robot moves on a fixed nominal Zero-Force Trajectory   contribution of this work: robust contact-rich manipulation in
(ZFT)1, a  conditional Transformer-based  Diffusion Model   unstructured environments requires explicitly bridging learn-
reconstructs a simulated Zero-Force Trajectory (sZFT) from   ing in the information domain with control in the energy
contact-perturbed motion and measured interaction wrenches.   domain.
The reconstructed sZFT represents an inferred equilibrium that    The code for the Transformer-based Diffusion Model, the
is consistent with the observed physical interaction and serves   robot controller, and the Apple Vision Pro teleoperation frame-
as the reference  for impedance modulation. A  directional  work  is available in our GitHub repository. Demonstration
adaptation scheme selectively reduces stiffness along non-task-   videos of all experiments can be found on the project website.
relevant directions while preserving rigidity along directions
essential for task execution.                                                                     II. PRELIMINARIES
  Other work, in addition to that presented here, has also
                                                                               First, we outline the process in both domains: Transformer-
begun to combine generative models with compliant control
                                                          based diffusion in the information domain and energy-based
for contact-rich manipulation. The Adaptive Compliance Pol-
                                                      Impedance Control in the energy domain.
icy (ACP) [43] shares several conceptual  similarities with
the present work, but differs in sensing modality, demon-
stration paradigm,  controller  architecture, and the  role of   A. Diffusion Models
the inferred equilibrium. ACP combines visual observations,     Diffusion Models learn to sample from a data distribution by
                                                           approximating the reverse-time dynamics of a Gaussian diffu-
  1The Zero-Force Trajectory (ZFT), introduced by Hogan [12], refers to the
commanded equilibrium motion in the unconstrained case: the unique end-   sion process [45]. Let {zi}Ni=1 be independent and identically
effector pose at which the interaction wrench vanishes.                     distributed samples from the data distribution pdata; the goal is

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
                                                                                                                                                  3


TABLE I: Preview of experimental outcomes (full details in Section IV). Fixed impedance fails in contact-rich tasks, while
Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning achieves robust success by reconstructing a contact-consistent sZFT.


                  Controller                                Parkour            Cylindrical Peg   Square Peg   Star Peg

                  Fixed impedance            × (stopped at first obstacle)      100%         13%      0%
                  Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning     ✓(smooth traversal)         100%         100%      100%


to learn a parametric family of distributions {pθ}θ∈Θ such that  t=T, . . . , 1, yielding z0 as a sample from the model [47].
pθ ≈pdata. A forward Markov chain maps a clean sample z0   For robotic trajectory generation, this iterative denoising maps
to (approximately) N(0, I) over T steps. The learned reverse-   pure noise into trajectories that are consistent with task goals
time chain iteratively denoises zt to produce a sample that   (Figure 1).
approximates pdata (Figure 1).                                     5) Conditional Diffusion: To generate task-consistent be-
  1) Forward Diffusion: The forward diffusion process de-   havior, the denoising process is conditioned on an additional
fines a Markov chain with Gaussian transitions                 context variable c  (e. g., goals, scene  state, or  interaction
                                                            wrench). The reverse model and noise predictor then become          q(zt | zt−1) = N(√αt zt−1, (1 −αt) I) ,       (1)
                                                           pθ(zt−1 |zt, c) and εθ(zt, t, c).
where αt := 1−βt and {βt}Tt=1 ⊂(0, 1) is a predefined noise     Conditioning can be implemented in several ways, includ-
schedule. The quantity (1 −αt) = βt is the per-step diffusion   ing (i) early fusion (e. g., feature concatenation),  (ii) cross-
variance, which controls the signal-to-noise ratio across time.   attention over context tokens for Transformer denoisers, or
After T steps with ¯αT :=QTi=1 αi ≈0, the marginal distribu-    (iii) lightweight fusion layers [50], [51].
tion approaches a standard normal distribution , zT ≈N(0, I).     In our approach, conditional diffusion is central. By condi-
The marginal distribution at step t has the closed form         tioning on external wrenches, the model reconstructs sZFTs
                                                                      that are consistent with physical interaction. This ties the de-            q(zt | z0) = N √¯αt z0, (1 −¯αt) I  ,          (2)
                                                               noising process in the information domain to the regulation of
which admits the equivalent reparameterization                  interaction in the energy domain. More details about Diffusion
            √                              Models can be found in [47], [49], [52], [53].        zt = √¯αt z0 +   1 −¯αt ε,     ε ∼N(0, I).     (3)                                                                  6) Transformer-based  Diffusion  Model:  In  this  paper,
  2) Noise Schedule: The per-step variances {βt}Tt=1 define  we choose  a  Transformer-based  denoising network  since
the noise schedule, which controls how the signal-to-noise   robotic  trajectories are time  series with context-dependent
ratio SNRt = ¯αt/(1 −¯αt) decays from ∞to 0 over time.   effects  (e. g.,  contact  events with delayed  consequences).
A well-chosen schedule balances the complexity of denoising,   Self-attention provides a content-based global receptive field
keeping early steps near-deterministic and later steps close to  and fully parallelizable training, which is advantageous over
pure noise. [46], [47]                                        Recurrent or Convolutional Neural Networks for sequence
  3) Reverse Process and Learning Objective: The true re-   modeling [41], [54].
verse q(zt−1 | zt) is intractable, as  it marginalizes over z0.    At each diffusion step, pose tokens are formed from trans-
However, since the forward chain  is linear–Gaussian, the   lations and unit-quaternions. These tokens are embedded and
posterior q(zt−1 |zt, z0) is itself Gaussian with mean ˜µt(zt, z0)   enriched with learned positional and timestep embeddings.
and variance ˜βtI [48]. The model represents pθ(zt−1 | zt) =   Interaction signals (forces and moments) are projected  to
N(µθ(zt, t), Σθ(zt, t)) and fit θ by minimizing the variational   context tokens and integrated through a multi-head cross-
bound Pt DKL q(zt−1 | zt, z0) ∥pθ(zt−1 | zt)  . With the ε-   attention layer. Here, trajectory tokens serve as queries while
parameterization,                                              context  tokens  serve  as keys and  values. The combined
                                                          sequence  is then processed by  stacked  self-attention and
                  1            βt
        µθ(zt, t) = √αt  zt − √1 −¯αt εθ(zt, t)   ,           feed-forward(MLP) head predictslayers, andthea 7Dlightweightnoise (3DMulti-layertranslationsPerceptronand 4D
                                                                 unit-quaternions) for each token. This architecture capturesand zt = √¯αtz0 + √1 −¯αt ε, the objective reduces (up to
                                                           temporal structure while conditioning on interaction signals, aconstants) to the noise-prediction loss [47]:
                                                            requirement that is central for contact-rich applications [54]–
                  h                    √              2 i                                                                                        .    [59]. More details about Transformer-based models can be Lsimple(θ) = Et,z0,ε   ε −εθ √¯αtz0 +  1 −¯αt ε, t   2
                                                         found in [53], [54], [58], [59].
  4) Training and Inference Algorithms: Training follows a
noise-prediction objective: at each iteration, a clean sample
z0 ∼pdata, a timestep t ∈{1, . . . , T} (uniform), and Gaussian                                                             B. Energy-based Impedance Control
noise ε ∼N(0, I) are sampled. The closed-form forward
diffusion produces zt, then the network εθ is updated to mini-     Impedance Control regulates the dynamic relationship be-
mize mean-squared error between ε and its prediction εθ(zt, t)   tween motion and interaction wrenches. Rather than com-
[47], [49]. At inference, generation starts from zT ∼N(0, I)  manding exact  positions, the robot behaves  like a  virtual
and applies the learned reverse transitions pθ(zt−1 | zt) for   mechanical system characterized by stiffness, damping, and

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
                                                                                                                                                  4


inertia2. In contrast to admittance control3, the impedance     1) Damping design: The damping design was formulated
formulation enables the robot to maintain compliance while   to ensure that energy dissipation scales consistently with both
ensuring stability when interacting with passive environments   the commanded  stiffness K{t,r} and the task-space  inertia
[6], [36], [61], [62].                                               for  translations and  rotations  Λ{t,r} ∈R3×3. To account
  From an energy perspective, Impedance Control transforms   for numerical issues near singular configurations, Λ{t,r} was
the potential energy stored in a virtual spring to the work done  computed using a damped least-squares method [2].
by external wrenches [63]. Let the pose displacement be      A user-selected positive time constant d > 0 defines the
                                                             diagonal damping ratio matrix
                     et
       ∆x =      ∈se(3),                        (4a)
                   er                                                                   D{t,r} = d I3.                      (8)
              et := p −p0 ∈R3,                       (4b)  The symmetric positive semidefinite square roots pΛ{t,r} and
             er := log Q0Q−1 ∈R3 ≃so(3).         (4c)  pK{t,r} are obtained by eigendecomposition for Λ{t,r} and
                                                          elementwise for K{t,r}. As presented in [64], an intermediate
where the observed pose  is (p, Q) ∈R3 × S3 and the  damping matrix B{t,r} is constructed as
equilibrium pose is (p0, Q0) ∈R3 × S3. Any unit quaternion
                                    q     qadmits the unit axis–angle representation                                       B{t,r} =   Λ{t,r} D{t,r}   K{t,r}
                                                                                                                                  (9)
                   θ          θ                         q     q   Q =  cos( 2), u sin( 2)  ,  ∥u∥= 1, θ ∈[0, π].    (5)             +   K{t,r} D{t,r}   Λ{t,r}.

In this formulation, the logarithm map is applied to the error                                                   From B{t,r}, a scalar damping coefficient is computed to
quaternion Q0Q−1 to return the axis–angle error vector er =   normalize the dissipation relative to the overall stiffness:
u0 θ0.
  Let Kt, Kr ∈R3×3 be diagonal, positive semidefinite                   2 tr(B{t,r})     2 tr(B{t,r})
                                                                                            λ{t,r} =        =                      .      (10)
translational and  rotational  stiffness  matrices and K =                         tr(K{t,r})     kx + ky + kz
diag(Kt, Kr). Define the potential energy
                                                                      Finally, the damping matrices can be expressed as
     U(∆x) =  12 e⊤t Ktet +  12 e⊤r Krer ∈R≥0.     (6)
                                                              Bt = λt Kt,                    (11)
The elastic wrench Felastic ∈se∗(3) can then be derived from
the gradient                                                       for translation and
                                                           Br = λr Kr,                    (12)
                  ∂U          felastic
                    Felastic =    =                 ,             (7)
                ∂∆x      melastic                      for rotation.
                                                                  2) Control Force: The force  fctrl ∈R3  is composed ofwith felastic ∈R3 and melastic ∈R3 being the elastic force and                                                                                          felastic and damping through matrix Bt ∈R3×3 that acts on the
moment, respectively.                                                                 end-effector translational velocity ˙p ∈R3. It can be calculated
                                                               as
  2And possibly higher-order dynamic effects.
  3Admittance control requires additional methods to guarantee passivity [60].                               fctrl = felastic −Bt ˙p.               (13)





Fig. 1: Diffusion overview. Bottom: dashed arrows depict the forward process q(zt | zt−1) which gradually corrupts a clean
trajectory z0. Top: solid arrows depict the reverse process pθ(zt−1 | zt) which is learned to reconstruct structured robotic
behavior. Figure adapted from [45].

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
                                                                                                                                                  5


  3) Control Moment: The moment mctrl ∈R3 is composed   website and the code for ZFT generation is publicly available
of melastic and damping through matrix Br ∈R3×3 that acts  on GitHub.
on the angular velocity of the end-effector ω ∈so(3). It can    The sZFT, in contrast, is reconstructed online by the diffu-
be calculated as                                                sion model from measured end-effector motion and interaction
                                                           wrenches. It provides a denoised estimate of the equilibrium
                   mctrl = melastic −Br ω.              (14)                                                                     trajectory that explains the observed interaction. During de-
  4) Control Torque:  Finally, the transpose of the Jacobian   ployment, the robot continues to track the nominal ZFT as the
J(q)  : Rn →se(3) provides the mapping between the 6-  commanded motion reference, while the reconstructed sZFT
dimensional wrenches and the commanded joint torques τctrl ∈    is used exclusively for impedance adaptation. Specifically,
Rn:                                                             the elastic energy in the virtual springs and external work
                                                fctrl                      exchanged with the environment (Equations (24) - (25)) are
                           τctrl = J(q)T              .               (15)
                                    mctrl                     computed with respect to the reconstructed sZFT, enabling
                                                               online estimation of stiffness and damping consistent with the
  In addition to the control wrench, the environment con-                                                           observed contact behavior. In this way, the diffusion model
tributes external wrenches Fext ∈se∗(3).                                                          does not directly generate impedance, but instead infers the
  The controller implemented in this paper can be found in                                                                   interaction-consistent equilibrium underlying the impedance
our Github repository.                                                                       controller.
  5) Norton Equivalent Network: The Impedance Control                                                            For example, when the robot encounters an unexpected
framework can be illustrated by the Norton Equivalent Net-                                                                   obstacle, the planned ZFT drives the end-effector into contact,
work [6], [9], as represented in Figure 2. Here, two sources                                                           producing an external wrench. Conditioned on this wrench, the
interact to manage physical interaction:                                                              Diffusion Model reconstructs the sZFT and updates the con-
   • The motion source, which represents a sequence of equi-   trolled impedance. An illustration of the difference between
     librium poses {p0, Q0} that together form the ZFT.     ZFT and sZFT can be seen in Figure 4.
   • The impedance source, which represents the baseline     Having illustrated the effect conceptually, we now formalize
     stiffness K.                                                the denoising process, which can be expressed in translational
The motion source  is part of the information domain. For  and rotational noise components. For translations, the  full
contact-rich manipulation,  it  is a virtual nominal trajectory   noise is defined as
that  lies beyond  the physical  constraints imposed by  the
                                                                                                       pnoise = p −p0.                  (16)environment. Impedance couples the motion source in the
information domain to the energy domain (energy exchange                                                        During training, a fraction of this noise is added to the clean
through F and {˙p, ω}), a key property that we exploit later                                                              equilibrium pose via the noise scheduler (Section III-B), and
for energy-based stiffness estimation (Section III-E).                                                                 the network is trained to predict it. At inference, the predicted
                                                               noise ˆpnoise is subtracted from the observation to reconstruct
       III. DIFFUSION-BASED IMPEDANCE LEARNING         the equilibrium position iteratively,
A. Diffusion Model for Reconstruction of sZFT
                                                                                                           ˆp0 = p −ˆpnoise.                  (17)
  From the perspective of diffusion, the displacement ∆x
can be interpreted as noise corrupting the equilibrium pose     For rotations, the full noise is represented by the relative
(p0, Q0). The role of the Diffusion Model is to reconstruct   quaternion
the equilibrium pose by iteratively removing this noise. During                          Qnoise = Q Q−10  ,                  (18)
training, the model learns to predict the difference between the
                                                      which encodes the rotational displacement between the ob-observed pose (p, Q) and the ground truth equilibrium pose,
                                                             served quaternion Q and  the equilibrium quaternion Q0.guided by the measured external wrench Fext (Figure 3). At in-
                                                                       Partial training noise  is injected to Q0 using SLERP [65]ference, the model denoises ∆x and outputs the reconstructed
sZFT (ˆp0, ˆQ0).                                                (Section III-B), and the network is trained to predict ˆQnoise.
                                                     At inference, the equilibrium quaternion is reconstructed by  Throughout this paper, all quantities denoted by a hat (ˆ· )
are predictions of the Diffusion Model and correspond to the                         ˆQ0 = Q ˆQ−1noise.                   (19)
sZFT.
   It  is important to distinguish between the nominal ZFT    The reconstructed sZFT provides the key link between the
(p0, Q0) and the reconstructed sZFT  (ˆp0, ˆQ0) in our for-   Diffusion Model and impedance adaptation. It serves as the
mulation. The ZFT represents the programmed nominal mo-   input for the energy-based stiffness estimation described in
tion reference and remains fixed during execution. In  this   Section III-E.
work, ZFTs were generated programmatically by chaining
waypoints using minimum-jerk interpolation and Spherical
                                                             B. Noise SchedulingLinear Interpolation (SLERP) [65]. More generally, ZFTs can
also be obtained through frame-based programming, imitation     For the denoising process, the maximum noise magnitude
learning for free-space motion [66], [67], or teleoperation [68].  was computed separately for translations and rotations, and a
A video of the demonstrations  is available on the project   variational noise schedule was applied across diffusion steps.

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
                                                                                                                                                  6


                        Information domain                               Energy domain
                                       𝜕𝒰
                            𝑭=             𝝉                    Impedance 𝑲                    𝜕Δ𝒙
                        source:            Potential Energy 𝒰            𝑱𝑻(𝒒)


                                  Δ𝐱                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Environment                    Motion            −                                       𝒒̇
                                    !            𝑱(𝒒)
                        source:     𝒑", 𝑸"         {𝒑, 𝑸}          {𝒑̇, 𝝎}


Fig. 2: Norton equivalent network to represent physical interaction as the combination of a virtual motion source and an
impedance source. The displacement ∆x is coupled to stiffness K to generate wrench.


         𝑭!"#
                                         noise
                      Diffusion Model
         𝒑, 𝑸

Fig. 3: Diffusion-based reconstruction of the simulated Zero-
Force Trajectory (sZFT). The observed pose {p, Q} together
with the external wrench Fext is treated as noise relative to
the equilibrium {p0, Q0}. The Diffusion Model iteratively                                                  {𝑊}
denoises this input to reconstruct the equilibrium trajectory,
                                                                                                 {𝐸𝐸}which is then used in energy-based stiffness estimation.

                                                                  𝑍𝐹𝑇(𝒑!, 𝑸!)                    𝑠𝑍𝐹𝑇(𝒑*!, 𝑸+!)
  1) Translations: For translations, the deviation between the
observed end-effector position p and the ground-truth ZFT p0
was treated as noise. Additional zero-mean Gaussian noise   Fig. 4: Illustration of the nominal Zero-Force Trajectory during
ϵgauss ∼N(0, σ2I) was injected during training to improve   deployment (ZFT, light blue) and the reconstructed simulated
generalization and prevent overfitting [69]. The translational   Zero-Force Trajectory (sZFT, skin color), generated by the
noise for the model was defined as                            Diffusion Model. The ground  truth sZFT was created by
                                                                    teleoperation, which tracked the wrist frame {W} and serves
                   noiset = p −p0 + ϵgauss,              (20)   as an input to the robot controller to move the end-effector
                                                         frame {EE}. In the illustration, the ZFT  is just a straightwith perturbed positions computed as
                                                                           line. However, due to the external wrench during contact,
                      pnoise = p0 + βt · noiset,              (21)   the Diffusion Model will reconstruct the sZFT to imitate the
                                                           demonstrated behavior. Autonomously, the robot will adapt its
where βt is the noise scaling factor at diffusion step t.                                                           compliant behavior through impedance to smoothly go over
  2) Rotations: In our robot controller, orientations are rep-
                                                                 the obstacle.
resented with unit quaternions Q. Injecting noise, as in the
translational case, would violate the unit-norm constraint and
distort the geometry of rotations. To address this, we introduce     where Ω= arccos(⟨Qa, Qb⟩) is the angle between Qa and
a SLERP-based [65] noise scheduler that perturbs quaternions  Qb, and µ ∈[0, 1] is the interpolation factor.
directly on the unit sphere. This approach preserves valid
orientations, provides perturbations consistent with geodesics,   C. Data Collection
and allows rotational noise to be scheduled smoothly across
                                                                All training data for Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning
diffusion  steps. To our  best knowledge,  this  is  the  first
                                                      were collected through teleoperation using the VisionPro-
physically-consistent noise scheduler for rotations in robotics,
                                                           Teleop framework [44] and Apple Vision Pro (AVP), which
formulated directly on a global representation of rotations [6].
                                                           enabled markerless and spatially unconstrained teleoperation
  The SLERP process is illustrated in Figure 5. The interpo-
                                                            without external infrastructure. The AVP continuously tracked
lation between two quaternions Qa and Qb is defined as                                                                 the operator’s hand motion in six degrees of freedom, allowing
                                 sin((1 −µ)Ω)                 teleoperation in free space, during contact interactions, and
        SLERP(Qa, Qb; µ) =          Qa
                                 sin(Ω)                   throughout  transitions into and out of contact (Figure  6).
                                                         (22)
                              sin(µΩ)                   Within the framework, the operator’s hand pose was repre-
                 +       Qb.                sented as a homogeneous transformation matrix based on a                                 sin(Ω)

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
                                                                                                                                                  7


                      𝑸𝒂                             and the robot hand; 3) mixed condition: subjects alternated
                                    𝑸𝒊𝒏𝒕                       between relaxing  their arm and  actively cooperating with
                    Ω      𝑸𝒃                        the robot motion. Together, these conditions were chosen to
                                                               capture varying levels of subject participation and assistance,
                                                             providing diverse interaction behaviors for learning contact-
                     SLERP                                  consistent impedance adaptation.
                                                     The study was approved by MIT’s Committee on the Use of
                                                Humans as Experimental Subjects (COUHES), with informed
                                                            consent obtained from all participants. This dataset was used
Fig. 5: Rotational noise scheduling with Spherical Linear   to  train  the model presented  in  this paper; however,  the
Interpolation (SLERP) [65]. Perturbed quaternions stay on the   deployment of upper-limb rehabilitation applications is part
unit sphere, enabling geometry-consistent noise injection and   of a separate project and is not reported here.
removal.                                              The desired compliant robot behavior was chosen during
                                                                 the data  collection phase and kept unchanged during the
                                                        deployment phase (Section IV). For  all  trials, the baseline
27-joint kinematic hand model. In our implementation, the   translational  stiffness was  set to 800 m,N  and the baseline
handMiddleFingerKnuckle (index 11) was used as the   rotational stiffness was set to 150 Nmrad .
primary keypoint for translation and rotation tracking. During
teleoperation, the tracked wrist pose served as the commanded  D. Model Selection to Reconstruct sZFT
ZFT and was subsequently treated as the ground-truth sZFT                                                     The model selection was guided by two initial requirements:
for model training. In parallel, external interaction wrenches at                                                                                    (i) sufficient accuracy in reconstructing both translational and
the robot end-effector were recorded using a force/torque sen-                                                                     rotational components and (ii) a small model capacity, suitable
sor. Pose data were transferred via shared memory between the                                                                    for real-time deployment. To evaluate this trade-off, we varied
Python-based VisionProTeleop framework and the C++ robot                                                          hidden dimensions, number of layers, attention heads, and
controller. The implementation of the teleoperation interface                                                               loss-weighting strategies.
is publicly available in our GitHub repository.                                                           Performance was assessed using translational error (posi-
  Unlike demonstrations with manipulandums and haptic in-                                                                      tional loss in mm) and rotational error (angular magnitude θ
terfaces, the AVP framework allowed spatially unrestricted                                                           about unit-axis and unit-axis deviation α in degrees).
teleoperation. In practice, the operator’s hand pose tracked by                                                               Figure 7 provides a graphical representation of the rotational
AVP could move freely in space, unconstrained by physical                                                                      losses, illustrating the decomposition into axis deviation αerror
objects, whereas the robot end-effector was constrained by                                                       and magnitude error θerror.
the actual contact surfaces. Therefore, the shift between the    The initial requirements were 2 mm for the translational
commanded ZFT and the robot pose generated an external   error and 2.8◦(half of the small-angle approximation) for the
wrench.                                                      angular error and unit-axis deviation. These values were deter-
  Two  datasets were  generated. The  first  consisted  of a  mined heuristically based on previous contact-rich experiments
parkour-style scenario with multiple obstacles (Figure 6, right).   [70].
A total of 17,457 samples were recorded. These data captured     Table II reports the results for the Transformer-based Diffu-
diverse  interaction behaviors, including free-space motion,   sion Model on the parkour dataset. The configuration with 512
transitions into and out of contact, and sustained contact with   hidden dimensions, 4 attention heads, and 6 layers achieved the
unknown obstacles in an unstructured environment.             best balance between accuracy and efficiency, with positional
  The second dataset focused on robotic-assisted upper-limb   error of 0.994 mm, θ error of 0.249◦, and α error of 0.003◦. In-
rehabilitation tasks (Figure 6, left). A total of 55,838 samples   creasing the loss weight of the θ component (factor 5) yielded
were recorded. Eight healthy adults (4 female, 4 male; age   marginal improvements in rotational accuracy (θ = 0.240◦,
20–64 years; height 162–192 cm; weight 64–91 kg) performed  α = 0.003◦) without degrading translational fidelity.
three types of movements derived from standard post-stroke   A notable result was that retraining this model on a com-
rehabilitation protocols:  (i) passive lifting, consisting of re-   bined dataset of parkour and robotic-assisted therapy motions–
peated vertical up-and-down motions of the arm;  (ii) out-  two completely  different physical  interaction  tasks–further
of-shoulder movements, involving arm motions that include   improved accuracy (positional error 0.883 mm, θ error 0.233◦,
shoulder rotation; and (iii) an activity-of-daily-living (ADL)  α error 0.002◦). Importantly, the two datasets were collected
task, in which subjects mimicked a feeding motion by moving   with different tools and inertial properties (lightweight tool for
the hand toward the mouth.                                  parkour and a 600 g prosthetic hand for physical therapy) yet
  Each therapy type was performed under three interaction   the model compensated for these differences without explicit
conditions designed to elicit different levels of subject par-   training. This robustness highlights the ability of Diffusion-
ticipation: 1) passive condition: subjects were instructed to  Based Impedance Learning to generalize across different tasks
relax their arm and allow the robot to move it without resis-  and tool inertial properties on a single robot platform. The
tance; 2) cooperative condition: subjects observed the motion   selected architecture was ultimately adopted as the final model
demonstrated by the teleoperator wearing the AVP and actively   because it satisfied the accuracy requirements while remaining
attempted to minimize the interaction forces between their arm   small enough for real-time torque control.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
                                                                                                                                                  8





Fig. 6: Examples of teleoperated demonstrations used for training. (Left) Physical therapy dataset with robotic-assisted upper-
limb tasks. (Right) Parkour dataset with free-space and contact-rich motions across obstacles.

TABLE II: Transformer-based Diffusion Model results (parkour dataset). The selected model (highlighted) combines high
accuracy with low computational complexity.

                        Hidden Dim   Heads   Layers   θ Loss [deg]  α Loss [deg]    Positional Loss [mm]

                             512         4        4          0.307           0.004               1.047
                             512         4        6          0.249           0.003               0.994
                             512         8        4          0.282           0.004               1.030
                             512         8        6          0.286           0.003               0.989
                             1024         4        4          0.228           0.003               1.033
                             1024         4        6          0.224           0.003               1.033
                             1024         8        4          0.227           0.003               1.016
                             1024         8        6          0.288           0.004               1.057



                                                 sZFT by the Diffusion Model changes the deformation, and
                                                               thus the elastic energy stored in the virtual springs. By relating
                                                                         this change in elastic energy to the measured work, we can
                                                      compute the stiffness equivalent that reproduces the observed
                                                                    interaction behavior.
                                                            For deployment, a user specifies baseline translational and
                                                                     rotational stiffness values that define the nominal interaction
                                                                 behavior. During  execution,  the Diffusion Model  predicts
                                                                 the sZFT, which represents the equilibrium pose correction,
Fig. 7: Graphical representation of rotational losses, showing                                                                  consistent with the current interaction wrench. Rather than
axis deviation αerror and magnitude error θerror.                                                         modifying the nominal ZFT, we adapt the impedance by
                                                            reducing stiffness equivalent to the equilibrium reconstruction
                                                                 via sZFT.  Another notable finding of this work is the small amount
                                                                         Specifically, we compute nonnegative  stiffness reductionof training data required. The model already showed strong
                                                           terms k⋆t,i and k⋆r,i for each translational and rotational axisperformance on the parkour dataset with only tens of thou-
                                                                             i ∈{x, y, z}. These terms are subtracted from the predefinedsands of samples (17,000 samples). For the combined data
                                                                baseline stiffness values Kt,i,max and Kr,i,max, yielding theset, 72,000 samples at a controller rate of 0.005 s correspond
                                                                     effective stiffness used by the controller:to just 1.6 hours of demonstration. This is in contrast to image-
based Diffusion Models, which require 100,000 samples even                                                                                                       kt,i = Kt,i,max −k⋆t,i,               (23a)
for learning single manipulation skills such as block pushing
                                                                                                   kr,i = Kr,i,max −k⋆r,i.              (23b)[68], [71].

                                                                  In our experiments, the baseline stiffness values were set de-
E. Energy-based Stiffness Estimation                                                                      liberately high (Kt,i,max = 800 N/m, Kr,i,max = 150 Nm/rad).
  Impedance control can be interpreted as virtual springs that  High baseline  stiffness  is  desirable  for  tasks  that require
pull the robot end-effector toward an equilibrium pose. When   significant elastic energy storage, such as pressing or inserting
the robot interacts with the environment, the deformation of   a workpiece  into  another. We  therefore  selected  baseline
these virtual springs is transformed into external wrenches,   stiffness values that the robot can realistically render and that
which perform mechanical work. A shift of the reconstructed   are sufficient for all tasks considered. The Diffusion Model

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
                                                                                                                                                  9


then autonomously reduced these stiffnesses when interaction  Algorithm 1 Energy-Based Stiffness Estimation
occurred, adapting the impedance only where necessary.            1: Input: ˆet, ˆer, ˙e, ω, fext, mext, κt, κr, γt, γr,
  1) Translations:  For  translations,  the displacement was                                                                                                    fthres, mthres, Kt,max, Kr,max, ε
defined as  ˆet = p −ˆp0. The elastic energy Et ∈R of a      2: for i ∈{x, y, z} do
virtual translational spring is                                                 3:        ˜et,i ←κt ˆet,i −γt ˙ei
                                                                                       4:       if |fi| < fthres or ˜e2t,i < ε then                               1
                       Espringt  = 2Kt∥ˆet∥2.                (24)      5:       k⋆t,i ←0
                                                                                       6:     else
Here, ∥.∥denotes the Euclidean norm. The work done by the                         fi ˜et,i                                                                                       7:       k⋆t,i ←2
external force fext ∈R3 along the virtual displacement ˆet is                               ˜e2t,i + ε
given by the inner product ⟨., .⟩:                                            8:       k⋆t,i ←max(0, k⋆t,i)
                                                                                       9:    end if
                    Eworkt  = ⟨fext, ˆet⟩.                 (25)    10:     Kt,i ←clip Kt,max,i −k⋆t,i, 0, Kt,max,i
                                                                              11:       ˜er,i ←κr ˆer,i −γr ωi
Equating the right hand sites of Equation (24) with Equa-    12:       if |mi| < mthres or ˜e2r,i < ε then
tion (25) yields the translational stiffness contribution             13:       k⋆r,i ←0
                                                                              14:     else
                                                            mi ˜er,i                                             ˆet⟩                               2⟨fext,                                                                 k⋆r,i ←2                                                         .                  (26)    15:                  k⋆t =                                                                                                                       ˜e2r,i + ε                                 ∥ˆet∥2
                                                                              16:       k⋆r,i ←max(0, k⋆r,i)
To avoid oscillatory behavior, a damping term proportional to    17:    end if
end-effector velocity was introduced:                                 18:     Kr,i ←clip Kr,max,i −k⋆r,i, 0, Kr,max,i
                                                                              19: end for
                               ˜et = κt ˆet −γt ˙p,                 (27)    20: Output: Kt, Kr

where κt is a unit translational stiffness, ˙p is the translational
end-effector velocity, and γt a damping coefficient.               4) Directional Adaptation: For deployment of our model
  2) Rotations: For rotations, the unit axis–angle representa-   in real-world experiments, the energy-based estimator was
tion ˆer = ˆu0 ˆθ0 was used (Equation (5)). The corresponding   extended with a directional adaptation step. A uniform re-
elastic energy Er ∈R of the virtual rotational spring is        duction of stiffness in response to external perturbations can
                                                              prevent task execution, e. g., the end-effector may stop when
                       Espringr  = 12Kr∥ˆer∥2.                (28)   encountering an obstacle. To avoid  this problem,  stiffness
                                                   was modulated according to the directional relevance of each
The work done by the external moment mext ∈R3 about the   axis with respect to the generated sZFT of the Diffusion
rotational displacement ˆer can be calculated by              Model. The alignment factors below are defined relative to
                                                                               ˆp0 and ˆu0ˆθ0 contained in ˆet and ˆer, which are outputs of the
                   Eworkr  = ⟨mext, ˆer⟩.                 (29)   Diffusion Model. Hence, the adaptation mechanism depended
                                                                          critically on the reconstructed sZFT: if the nominal free-space
Equating the right hand sites of Equation (28) with Equa-  ZFT were used directly, the alignment factors would not re-
tion (29) results in the rotational stiffness contribution            flect the equilibrium under contact, and directional adaptation
                                                     would fail (Section IV).
                          2⟨mext, ˆer⟩                         For translations, the alignment factor                 k⋆r =                   .                 (30)
                               ∥ˆer∥2
                                                                                                                                      |ˆet,i|
                                                                                          ψt,i = ∥ˆet∥,   i ∈{x, y, z}            (32)Dynamic effects were addressed by augmenting the error with
a damping term:
                                                                    quantifies the contribution of each axis to the intended dis-
                                                             placement. Analogously, for rotations, we define
                           ˜er = κr ˆer −γr ω,                (31)
                                                                                                                                  |ˆer,i|
                                                                                       ψr,i =           i ∈{x, y, z}.            (33)where κr is a unit rotational stiffness, ω is the angular end-                           ∥ˆer∥,
effector velocity, and γr a damping coefficient.
                                                     The relative translational and rotational factors ρt,i and ρr,i  3) Algorithm: Algorithm 1 summarizes the procedure of
                                                             ensure that stiffness is decreased more strongly in directionsthe stiffness estimation. Stiffness was computed over a sliding
                                                                      that contribute little to the desired motion, while remainingwindow of 16 samples at 200 Hz (80 ms), which was sufficient
                                                                close to the baseline stiffness along task-relevant axes:given that the tasks were not highly dynamic. Thresholds of
1 N for force and 1 Nm for moment were applied, and values
                                                                                                           ρt,i = 1 −ψt,i,                 (34a)
below these limits were ignored to suppress phases of low
interaction.                                                                                          ρr,i = 1 −ψr,i.                 (34b)

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
                                                                                                                                                 10


  The final adapted stiffness values kt,i and kr,i were imple-   operator during data collection (Section III-C), who teleoper-
mented as:                                                     ated the robot through the parkour task (Figure 6, right).
                                                     The nominal ZFT was generated by kinesthetic teaching of a
                      kt,i = Kt,i,max −ρt,i k⋆t,i,             (35a)  number of key joint poses. A MATLAB script then computed
                     kr,i = Kr,i,max −ρr,i k⋆r,i.            (35b)   the corresponding end-effector trajectory by smoothly inter-
                                                                polating between these configurations and manually shifting
  As will be shown in the next  section,  this mechanism
                                                                 the trajectory along the negative z-direction to ensure constant
allowed the robot to move smoothly over obstacles in the
                                                                contact with the table surface (see coordinate frame shown in
parkour task and to achieve successful in peg-in-hole insertion.
                                                             Figure 9, left). It is important to note that the resulting nominal
  An overview of the proposed model architecture and work-                                             ZFT passed through the obstacles.
flow can be seen in Figure 8.                                                                       m
                                                     To protect the setup, stop conditions of ∥v∥= 0.24   s
                                                       and ∥fext∥= 20 N were defined. The constant-stiffness con-
IV. DEPLOYMENT OF DIFFUSION MODEL ON REAL ROBOT    troller already failed at the first obstacle: the end-effector was
                                                               stopped, energy accumulated in the virtual spring, and once  The model was deployed in two robotic use-cases designed
                                                                         this energy was released the end-effector accelerated into theto evaluate its performance in contact-rich scenarios. In our
                                                                  velocity stop condition. Forces of up to 15 N were observed.experiments, we deliberately focused on Impedance Control
                                                               In contrast, with Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning, therather than motion generation, since many real-world appli-
                                                               robot traversed all obstacles smoothly, i. e., without violatingcations require active compliance, e. g., final assembly tasks
                                                                 the velocity or force stop conditions. The stiffness adaptationwhere vision is occluded and only tactile sensing is avail-
                                                    mechanism prevented jamming in directions inconsistent withable. The first was a parkour-style task requiring continuous
                                                                 the ZFT while preserving rigidity along task-relevant axes.interaction while traversing unknown obstacles. The second
was a peg-in-hole insertion task with increasing geometric     Figure 10 shows the measured external wrenches together
complexity.                                                 with the commanded translational and rotational stiffness val-
                                                           ues for the Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning. The bottom  The experiments were conducted on a KUKA LBR iiwa
                                                                    plots illustrate the relative translational and rotational factorswith seven DOFs, using KUKA’s Fast Robot Interface (FRI)
for torque control with 5 ms sample time. Built-in gravity and   (Equation (34)) and the work done by the external force along
                                                                 the virtual displacement (Equations (25) and (29)).Coriolis/centrifugal compensation remained active through-
out. Robot kinematics and dynamics were computed via the     During  the  entire motion,  the  stiffness values changed
Exp[licit]-FRI interface4 [72]. A task-space impedance con-   dynamically  in response  to  external wrenches. This con-
troller was implemented (Section II-B). The external wrenches   tinuous adaptation reflected the underlying Diffusion-Based
were acquired with an ATI Gamma force/torque transducer,  Impedance Learning, which enabled the robot to remain com-
mounted on the robot flange. The code of the robot controller   pliant when unexpected contact occurred while maintaining
is publicly available on our public GitHub repository.            sufficient stiffness to progress through the parkour.
  In both experiments, we compared a task-space impedance     Translational stiffness was adapted asymmetrically depend-
controller with constant stiffness values against our proposed   ing on the directional contribution of forces. Around 12  s,
diffusion-based directional stiffness adaptation. For all trials,   force peaks of 4 N along the y-axis and 15 N along the z-axes
the baseline translational stiffness was identical to that used   arose. Nevertheless, Kp,y was reduced more strongly (reduced
during data collection and was set to 800 m,N while the baseline   to near 400 N/m) than Kp,z (remaining near 600 N/m) since
rotational stiffness was set to 150 Nmrad . The same damping   the relative translational factor along the z-axis was high. A
design was applied throughout the experiments (Section II-B).   similar effect is visible near 30 s: while fy reached an absolute
  All workpieces were fabricated with a PRUSA i3 MK3 3D   of nearly 4 N with stiffness near 420 N/m, fz was only 2 N yet
printer using PLA filament. The expected manufacturing error   stiffness dropped to about 200 N/m. These findings confirm
of the printer is on the order of 0.1 mm. All CAD models   that stiffness reduction was not simply proportional to force
used in the experiments are available on our GitHub repository.   magnitude but was determined by the alignment with the sZFT,
Demonstration videos of both experiments are provided on the   predicted by the Diffusion Model.
project website.                                                  Rotational stiffness also adapted directionally, with reduc-
  All plotted entities are expressed in the spatially-fixed robot   tions depending on which axis contributed less to the sZFT.
base coordinate frame. The colors of the experimental plots are  Around 12 s, moments appeared simultaneously about the x-
consistent with the colors of the coordinate axes in Figure 9.   and y-axes. Despite higher magnitudes about the x-axis, the
                                                                        stiffness Kr,y was reduced more strongly, showing that y-axis
                                                                    rotations were less important for the intended trajectory. This
A. Parkour                                                                     selective modulation allowed the robot to maintain stability
  The  first experiment consisted of a parkour-style task in   while avoiding unnecessary resistance to contact.
which the robot traversed three obstacles while maintaining
continuous contact with the table (Figure 9, left). The desired
                                                             B. Peg-In-Hole Insertion
physical interaction behavior was demonstrated by a human
                                                     The second experiment was a peg-in-hole insertion task with
  4https://GitHub.com/explicit-robotics/Explicit-FRI                       three different peg types: cylindrical, square, and star pegs. The

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
                                                                                                                                                 11



    Input Signals        Diffusion Model

                                                        𝒘𝒆𝒙𝒕,𝒕   External wrench
                                                                           𝒘𝒆𝒙𝒕,𝒕%𝟏    External wrench                                                                                                  Transformer
                                                                                                             Encoder + MLP

          …

                                                                                    𝒘𝒆𝒙𝒕,𝒕%𝟏𝟔
        Position +                                     𝒑𝒆𝒙𝒕,𝒕%𝟏𝟔   …       𝒑𝒆𝒙𝒕,𝒕%𝟏     𝒑𝒆𝒙𝒕,𝒕          Position         Time                           sZFT
    Unit-Quaternion                                                   Embedding     Embedding                          Reconstruction




                        Directional Adaptation      Stiffness Estimation

    Stiffness (𝑲)                 Energy-based Stiffness Estimation
Fig. 8: Overview of the proposed architecture and workflow. External wrenches and end-effector pose (position and unit-
quaternion) are processed as time-series inputs to a conditional Transformer-based Diffusion Model. External wrenches are
embedded as context tokens, while pose tokens are embedded with learned positional and diffusion-time encodings. The
Diffusion Model reconstructs a simulated Zero-Force Trajectory (sZFT), representing a contact-consistent equilibrium. This
reconstructed sZFT, together with the measured interaction signals, is passed to an energy-based stiffness estimator. Finally,
directional stiffness adaptation is applied according to the directional relevance of each coordinate axis.


nominal clearance between each peg and  its corresponding  The cylindrical peg succeeded in 30/30 trials. The square peg
hole was 0.14 mm for the square peg and 0.20 mm for the   succeeded in 4/30 trials. The star peg failed in all 30 trials.
circular and star pegs. All workpieces were fabricated with     In practice, more complicated pegs like the square and star
the same printer setup as for the parkour experiment. For all   peg often require extensive manual tuning of the ZFT, of the
trials, task success was defined as completely inserting the  impedance parameters, or both. This tuning is not only time-
peg.                                                   consuming but there is also no standard method that guarantees
  For each peg type, the ZFT was generated from three man-   success. These results show that more complicated assembly
ually demonstrated robot joint configurations, via kinesthetic   processes require more advanced strategies.
teaching: a starting configuration, an initial contact (“touch”)     In contrast, Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning achieved
configuration, and a final insertion configuration. These config-   30/30 successful insertions for all three peg types. This result
urations were recorded by physically guiding the robot through  was achieved by only demonstrating and interpolating three
the task. A smooth nominal ZFT was then generated using a   key poses per  trajectory. Hence, no advanced method for
MATLAB script by computing the corresponding end-effector   trajectory generation was needed. Moreover, the outcome is
poses and connecting them with a minimum-jerk interpolation.   particularly notable because the training data included only
To induce a controlled pulling force during the final insertion   parkour and upper-limb rehabilitation data (Section III-C).
phase, the equilibrium pose for final insertion was deliberately  No peg-in-hole demonstrations were used for training. Im-
shifted along the negative z-direction. After completing the   portantly, neither the Diffusion Model nor the impedance
insertion, the robot moved straight upward along the z-axis   controller is provided with any information about the peg or
(see coordinate frame in Figure 9, right). Importantly, during   hole geometry, pose, insertion axis, or clearance; all impedance
the touch pose the peg’s orientation was not aligned with the   adaptation was driven solely by measured interaction wrenches
edges of the square and star pegs. As a result, the nominal   during the motion.
ZFT did not encode any geometric alignment with the peg     Across all three peg geometries, execution times remained
shape.                                                   comparable despite the different contact conditions and inser-
  The three peg types represent increasing geometric com-   tion complexities. Mean completion times for 30 trials were
plexity. The  cylindrical peg  is  rotation-symmetric, which   10.8 ± 0.6 s for the circular peg, 10.2 ± 1.9 s for the square
makes the final orientation about the end-effector z-axis ir-   peg, and 12.3 ± 1.9 s for the star-shaped peg.
relevant. In contrast, the square and star pegs require precise     Figure 11 shows the stiffness adaptation for the star peg.
rotational alignment with an increasing number of edges,   Results for the other two pegs are provided in Appendix A.
which significantly increases task complexity.                During all experiments, force and moment thresholds were set
  This trend is reflected in the constant-stiffness experiments.   to 1 N and 1 Nm, respectively.

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
                                                                                                                                                 12


                                                                Ori             Ins





      𝒛            3              𝒛
                        1          𝒚  2
            𝒙
                                 𝒚
                            𝒙                                             𝑡

Fig. 9: Phases of the two experiments and the spatially fixed coordinate frames in which they are expressed. (Left) In the
parkour experiments, three obstacles are encountered (numbered 1–3). (Right) During peg insertion, the robot moved from the
starting pose to inclined contact with the hole (labeled “Ori”), followed by final insertion (with the start of insertion labeled
“Ins”). The colors of the major axes of the coordinate frames are shown in the experimental plots (Figure 10 and 11).


  As illustrated in Figure 11, stiffness values were reduced in     Importantly, the nominal ZFT was kept fixed throughout
response to external wrenches, with the amount of reduction   the ablation study. It was generated from simple kinesthetic
governed by the relative translational and rotational factors.   demonstrations and was not optimized for the two tasks and
For most of the experiment, the relative translation factor along   pegs. Videos illustrating the kinesthetic teaching procedure for
the z axis remained higher than along the y axis. For instance,   the parkour and peg-in-hole tasks are provided on the project
at around 11 s, small forces of 0.5 N appeared along the y   website.
axis. Nevertheless, the stiffness Kp,y was reduced to 600 N/m.      Specifically, we evaluated the following variants using the
During retraction of the peg at around 16 s,  it can be seen   baseline impedance parameters (800 mN  for translation and
that the relative translation factor along the z axis dropped  150 Nmrad for rotation):
and consequently the stiffness Kp,z was reduced to 500 N/m.                                                                 1) Uniform stiffness adaptation without directional adapta-
In contrast, the relative translation factor along the x axis                                                                               tion, using the reconstructed sZFT
increased and consequently the stiffness Kp,x was increased                                                                 2) Directional stiffness adaptation computed from the nom-
to 700 N/m.                                                                            inal ZFT
  Due to the imperfect commanded ZFT, large moments about
                                                        Uniform stiffness adaptation without directional modulationthe x- and y-axes occurred during execution. The relative
                                                                      failed in both experimental scenarios. In the parkour task, therotational factor about the z-axis remained low, leading to
                                                               robot was blocked at the first obstacles, while none of the peg-
substantial reductions in Kr,z, which even reached 0 N m
                                                                 in-hole insertions succeeded. Directional adaptation derivedbetween 8 s to 12 s. For the x-axis, the moments were initially
                                                      from the nominal ZFT also failed in contact-rich settings. Insmall. When the moments increased significantly between 11 s
                                                                 the parkour task, the robot exceeded safety limits and stopped.to 16 s, the controller maintained high  stiffness, since the
                                                               In the peg-in-hole experiments, this variant achieved 30/30relative rotational factor about the x-axis increased. A different
                                                              success only for the cylindrical peg, but failed for both thebehavior can be observed for the y-axis: during 11 s to 17 s,
                                                             square and star pegs.high moments reaching up to −10 N m occurred. Since the
                                                         These results confirm that directional adaptation alone isrelative rotational factor remained low, the stiffness dropped
                                                                       insufficient  if  it is derived from the nominal ZFT. Instead,and reached 0 N m.
                                                                    directional factors must be computed relative to the recon-
                                                                   structed sZFT for impedance adaptation to succeed.
C. Ablation Study                                       To further evaluate how different uniform and non-uniform
                                                                      fixed impedance parameters influence task success in the peg-  In addition to the two main controllers, we performed an
                                                                 in-hole experiment, we additionally evaluated the followingablation study to isolate the contributions of the reconstructed
                                                                     variants:sZFT (Section III-A) and the directional impedance adaptation
(Section III-E).                                                      a) Uniform high impedance: 800 mN  (translation), 150 Nmrad

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
                                                                                                                                                 13


               1      2     3                                     1      2     3





Fig. 10: Measured external wrenches and commanded translational and rotational stiffness during the parkour experiment with
stiffness adaptation. The relative translational and rotational factors show their respective contributions to stiffness modulation.
The bottom row reports the performed translational and rotational work (Equations (25) and (29)). Shaded gray regions denote
the three parkour obstacles. All quantities are expressed in the robot base frame; base-frame color coding and obstacle numbering
are shown in Figure 9.


     (rotation)                                               Videos of all ablation experiments for the star peg example
  b) Uniform medium impedance: 400 mN (translation), 50 Nmrad   are provided on our project website.
     (rotation)                              A summary of the ablation study for the peg-in-hole exper-
  c) Uniform low impedance: 200 mN  (translation), 7 Nmrad   iment can be found in Table III.
     (rotation)
  d) Best-found,  manually  tuned  non-uniform  impedance:                       V. DISCUSSION
     translation along z: 800 m;N  translation along x and y:    The experimental results confirm the central goal of this
    350 m;N  rotation about z: 5 Nmrad ; rotation about x and y:   work: enabling robust contact-rich manipulation by bridging
    100 Nmrad                                                     the information and the energy domains and therefore unifying
  For a) (uniform high impedance), the cylindrical peg suc-   state-of-the-art generative AI algorithms with model-based
ceeded in 30/30  trials, the square peg in 4/30  trials, and   control. In particular, the success of peg-in-hole insertions
the  star peg  failed in  all  trials. For b) (uniform medium   with unseen tool and task geometries demonstrates that sZFT
impedance), yielded 30/30 success for the cylindrical peg,   reconstruction generalizes beyond the training distribution.
13/30 success for the square peg, and 5/30 success for the    Compared to prior learning-based approaches, our frame-
star peg. For c) (uniform low impedance), it failed for all peg  work explicitly incorporates energy transformation, enabling
types, as the wrench required to orient the peg with the hole   stable impedance adaptation under contact. Compared to tradi-
was insufficient.                                                    tional model-based impedance controllers, it gains adaptability
  For d) (manually tuned non-uniform impedance), the cylin-  by reconstructing equilibrium trajectories directly from data.
drical peg succeeded in 30/30 trails, the square peg in 26/30   This ability to bridge domains accounts for the strong perfor-
trials, and the star peg in 21/30 trials. These parameters were  mance observed in unstructured environments.
identified by an experienced impedance control programmer     Task success in contact-rich assembly  is determined by
after testing 15 different parameter combinations. In contrast,   the interplay between the nominal motion reference and the
inexperienced users would likely struggle to identify a single   generated impedance, rather than by either component alone.
parameter set that performs robustly across all peg geometries.   For the peg-in-hole experiments of  this  paper, the  initial

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
                                                                                                                                                 14


                 Ori         Ins                                                 Ori         Ins





Fig. 11: Measured external wrenches and commanded translational and rotational stiffness during the peg-in-hole star insertion
experiment with stiffness adaptation. The relative translational and rotational factors show their respective contributions to
stiffness modulation. The bottom row reports the performed translational and rotational work (Equations (25) and (29)). The
shaded gray region denotes the insertion phase. All quantities are expressed in the robot base frame; base-frame color coding
is shown in Figure 9.

         TABLE III: Peg-in-hole success rates for the ablation study. All results are reported over 30 trials.

                            Controller Variant                             Cylindrical Peg   Square Peg   Star Peg

                            Time-varying Impedance
                              Diffusion Model (with directional adaptation)       100%         100%      100%
                              Diffusion Model w/o directional adaptation         0%         0%       0%
                               Directional adaptation w/o DM (nominal ZFT)      100%        0%       0%

                            Fixed Impedance
                          Uniform high (baseline)                      100%         13%      0%
                          Uniform medium                           100%         43%       17%
                          Uniform low                           0%         0%       0%
                            Best-found non-uniform                      100%         87%       70%



contact (“touch”) phase is particularly important because  it   upper-limb therapy, where stiffness must remain high along
establishes the conditions for the subsequent orientation and  non-movement directions, while stiffness along the intended
insertion phases. Nevertheless, the proposed framework ex-  movement direction should adapt depending on whether the
hibited considerable robustness to variations in the nominal   patient can execute the motion independently. In such settings,
trajectory. For both the cylindrical and square pegs, successful   the same framework can be used by solely adapting the
insertion was achieved for lateral offsets of up to approxi-   directional stiffness adaptation.
mately ±3 mm in the x and y directions. Even for the more    The force and moment thresholds in the stiffness estimator
demanding star-shaped peg, which requires accurate rotational   affect the responsiveness of impedance adaptation. In our
alignment, successful insertion remained possible for offsets   experiments, values of 1 N and 1 Nm were selected  to
of approximately ±1 mm. This observation is consistent with  match the noise characteristics of the ATI Gamma force/torque
the findings reported in [73].                                     sensor. These thresholds are not  task-specific and can be
 A key element of the framework  is directional stiffness   adjusted for different sensors or applications.
adaptation. This mechanism is generic and can be tailored to    At present, the adaptive impedance controller outputs diag-
applications in other domains. One example is robotic-assisted   onal, positive semidefinite stiffness matrices. This design sim-

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
                                                                                                                                                 15


plifies analysis and implementation but omits cross-coupling  which such knowledge is unavailable or unreliable due to un-
effects that have proven beneficial in traditional solutions such   structured environments. Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning
as remote-center compliance (RCC) devices [74], [75]. For   should therefore be understood as a general, interaction-driven
more complex assembly tasks, integrating coupled stiffness   alternative rather than a replacement for highly engineered
parameters may further enhance robustness and alignment   solutions in fully structured assembly lines.
accuracy. Exploring this extension is an important direction    Beyond these results, Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning
for future work.                                                  establishes a general interface between learning and model-
  In this study, the baseline impedance behavior used during   based control. It extends the role of generative models from
teleoperation was preserved during deployment, ensuring con-   visuomotor trajectory planning to physical interaction, demon-
sistency between the demonstrations used for training and the   strating that contact-rich manipulation can be learned from
interaction conditions encountered during execution. Future   relatively small datasets while maintaining real-time control
work should investigate robustness to changes in baseline   performance.
impedance, including deployment with substantially different     Looking ahead, we aim to extend  this framework from
stiffness settings than those used during data collection. Such   single-arm to dual-arm setups. While this work focuses on
experiments would provide further insight into the ability of  impedance learning and used a fixed ZFT, Diffusion-Based
the learned model to generalize across different compliant  Impedance Learning can naturally be embedded in hierarchical
behaviors and controller parameterizations.                      architectures that couple high-level visuomotor motion policies
  The proposed approach guarantees passivity when stiffness   with low-level impedance regulation.
is reduced: lowering stiffness dissipates stored potential en-
ergy and ensures that interaction with a passive environment
remains output strictly passive. However, when stiffness  is                    REFERENCES
increased back toward the baseline, passivity is not generally                                                                                      [1] N. Hogan, “Physical interaction via dynamic primitives,” in Geometric
guaranteed, as such changes can inject additional energy when-        and numerical foundations of movements.  Springer, 2017, pp. 269–299.
ever displacements are nonzero. In these cases, the controller     [2]  J. Lachner, F. Allmendinger, S. Stramigioli, and N. Hogan, “Shaping
                                                                           impedances to comply with constrained task dynamics,” IEEE Transac-
can be combined with previous work on passive impedance                                                                                           tions on Robotics, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2750–2767, 2022.
shaping [2] to enforce strict passivity.                                    [3]  J. Lachner, M. C. Nah, and N. Hogan, “A physically consistent stiffness
  In our work, we adopt a Transformer-based Diffusion Model         formulation for contact-rich manipulation,” The International Journal of
due to its ability to capture long range temporal dependencies         Robotics Research, vol. 0, no. 0, p. 02783649251393332, 0.
                                                                                      [4]  J. Lachner, F. Allmendinger, E. Hobert, N. Hogan, and S. Stramigioli,
and flexibly condition on multimodal interaction signals. Fu-        “Energy budgets for coordinate invariant robot control in physical hu-
ture work should investigate a systematic comparison with al-        man–robot interaction,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
ternative architectures such as convolutional or hybrid models          vol. 40, no. 8-9, pp. 968–985, Aug. 2021.
                                                                                      [5] N. Hogan, “Stable execution of contact tasks using impedance control,”
under matched parameter and computational budgets.                    in Proceedings. 1987 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Overall,  our  findings  demonstrate  that  Diffusion-Based         Automation, vol. 4.  IEEE, 1987, pp. 1047–1054.
Impedance Learning is highly effective in the experimental     [6]  J. Lachner, “A geometric approach to robotic manipulation in physical
                                                                           human-robot  interaction,” Ph.D.  dissertation,  University  of Twente,
setups investigated. While this provides strong evidence for        2022.
the viability of the approach, further studies across a wider     [7]  S. Stramigioli, Ed., Energy-Aware Robotics, ser. Mathematical Control
range of tasks and environments are needed to fully establish        Theory I.   Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2015, vol.
                                                                                 461.
its generality. Nevertheless, the framework offers a promising                                                                                      [8] H. v. Helmholtz, “II. ¨uber einige gesetze der vertheilung elektrischer
design principle for stable, safe, and adaptable robot interac-          str¨ome  in  k¨orperlichen  leitern  mit anwendung  auf  die  thierisch-
tion in other domains including industrial assembly, physical         elektrischen versuche,” Annalen der Physik und Chemie, vol. 89, no. 6,
                                                                                     pp. 211–233, 1853, english translation: “Some laws concerning the
Human-Robot Interaction, and robotic-assisted rehabilitation.                                                                                            distribution of electrical currents in conductors with applications to
                                                                                experiments on animal electricity”.
                   VI. CONCLUSION                                 [9] N. Hogan, “A general actuator model based on nonlinear equivalent
                                                                                  networks,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 19, no. 6,
  This work introduced Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning,                                                                                     pp. 1929–1939, 2014.
a framework that unifies generative trajectory models in the    [10] M. C. Nah, J. Lachner, and N. Hogan, “Robot control based on motor
information domain with adaptive impedance regulation in          primitives: A comparison of two approaches,” The International Journal
                                                                                           of Robotics Research, vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 1959–1991, 2024.
the energy domain. By reconstructing simulated Zero-Force                                                                               [11] M. C. Nah, J. Lachner, F. Tessari, and N. Hogan, “On the modularity of
Trajectories (sZFTs) from  contact-perturbed displacements         elementary dynamic actions,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Confer-
and external wrench signals, the method enables real-time        ence on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2024, pp. 1398–1405.
impedance adaptation for contact-rich manipulation.               [12] N. Hogan, “Impedance control-an approach to manipulation. i-theory.
                                                                                      ii-implementation. iii-applications,” ASME Journal of Dynamic Systems
  The framework consistently outperformed fixed and heuris-        and Measurement Control B, vol. 107, pp. 1–24, 1985.
tic strategies in experiments on a KUKA LBR iiwa. It enabled    [13]  J. Collins, D. Howard, and  J. Leitner, “Quantifying the reality gap
smooth traversal of obstacle-rich parkour environments where          in robotic manipulation tasks,” in 2019 International Conference on
                                                                                 Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2019, pp. 6706–6712.
conventional impedance control failed, and achieved 30/30    [14] M. Posa, C. Cantu, and R. Tedrake, “A direct method for trajectory
success rates in cylindrical, square, and star peg-in-hole inser-         optimization of rigid bodies through contact,” The International Journal
tions without any task-specific demonstrations in the training          of Robotics Research, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 69–81, 2014.
                                                                               [15] Z. Manchester and S. Kuindersma, “Variational contact-implicit  tra-
data. The experiments in this work intentionally withhold ge-          jectory optimization,” in Robotics Research: The 18th International
ometric information from the controller, targeting scenarios in       Symposium ISRR.  Springer, 2020, pp. 985–1000.

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
                                                                                                                                                 16



[16]  T. Pang, H. T. Suh, L. Yang, and R. Tedrake, “Global planning for    [39]  F. Zhang and M. Gienger, “Affordance-based robot manipulation with
      contact-rich manipulation via local smoothing of quasi-dynamic contact         flow matching,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.
     models,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2023.                           01083
[17]  T. Marcucci, R.  Deits, M.  Gabiccini, A.  Bicchi, and R. Tedrake,    [40] M. Shridhar, L. Manuelli, and D. Fox, “Perceiver-actor: A multi-task
     “Approximate hybrid model predictive control for multi-contact push         transformer for robotic manipulation,” in Conference on Robot Learning
     recovery in complex environments,” in 2017 IEEE-RAS 17th interna-        (CoRL), 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.05451
      tional conference on humanoid robotics (Humanoids).  IEEE, 2017, pp.    [41] M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair,
     31–38.                                                                  R. Rafailov, E. Foster, G. Lam, P. Sanketi, Q. Vuong, T. Kollar, B. Burch-
[18]  F. R. Hogan and A. Rodriguez, “Reactive planar non-prehensile manip-            fiel, R. Tedrake, D. Sadigh, S. Levine, P. Liang, and C. Finn, “Open-
      ulation with hybrid model predictive control,” The International Journal          vla: An open-source  vision-language-action model,” arXiv  preprint
      of Robotics Research, vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 755–773, 2020.                      arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
[19] M. Anitescu and F. A. Potra, “Formulating dynamic multi-rigid-body    [42]  T. L. Team, J. Barreiros, A. Beaulieu, A. Bhat, R. Cory, E. Cousineau,
      contact problems with friction as solvable linear complementarity prob-        H.  Dai,  C.-H.  Fang,  K.  Hashimoto, M.  Z.  Irshad, M.  Itkina,
     lems,” equivalentlinear Dynamics, vol. 14, pp. 231–247, 1997.               N. Kuppuswamy, K.-H. Lee, K. Liu, D. McConachie,  I. McMahon,
[20] A. Aydinoglu and M. Posa, “Real-time multi-contact model predictive        H. Nishimura, C. Phillips-Grafflin, C. Richter, P. Shah, K. Srinivasan,
      control via admm,” in 2022 International Conference on Robotics and        B. Wulfe, C. Xu, M. Zhang, A. Alspach, M. Angeles, K. Arora,
     Automation (ICRA).  IEEE, 2022, pp. 3414–3421.                             V. C. Guizilini, A. Castro, D. Chen, T.-S. Chu, S. Creasey, S. Curtis,
[21] H.  J. T. Suh, T. Pang, and R. Tedrake, “Bundled gradients through        R. Denitto, E. Dixon, E. Dusel, M. Ferreira, A. Goncalves, G. Gould,
      contact via randomized smoothing,” IEEE Robotics and Automation        D. Guoy,  S. Gupta, X. Han, K. Hatch, B. Hathaway, A. Henry,
      Letters, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 4000–4007, 2022.                               H.  Hochsztein,  P. Horgan,  S.  Iwase, D.  Jackson,  S.  Karamcheti,
                                                                                        S. Keh,  J. Masterjohn,  J. Mercat, P. Miller, P. Mitiguy, T. Nguyen,[22] H. J. T. Suh, T. Pang, T. Zhao, and R. Tedrake, “Dexterous contact-rich
                                                                                                              J.  Nimmer,  Y.  Noguchi,  R.  Ong,  A.  Onol,  O.  Pfannenstiehl,     manipulation via the contact trust region,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
                                                                             R. Poyner, L. P. M. Rocha, G. Richardson, C. Rodriguez, D. Seale,      https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.02291
                                                              M. Sherman, M.  Smith-Jones, D.  Tago,  P. Tokmakov, M.  Tran,
[23] Y. Li, G. Ganesh, N. Jarrass´e, S. Haddadin, A. Albu-Schaeffer, and
                                                                             B. V. Hoorick,  I. Vasiljevic, S. Zakharov, M. Zolotas, R. Ambrus,
     E. Burdet, “Force, impedance, and trajectory learning for contact tooling
                                                                         K.  Fetzer-Borelli, B.  Burchfiel, H. Kress-Gazit,  S. Feng,  S. Ford,
     and haptic identification,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 34, no. 5,
                                                                         and R. Tedrake, “A  careful examination of  large behavior models
     pp. 1170–1182, 2018.
                                                                                           for  multitask  dexterous  manipulation,”  2025.  [Online].  Available:
[24] Y. Li, L. Zheng, Y. Wang, E. Dong, and S. Zhang, “Impedance learning-                                                                                       https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.05331
     based adaptive force tracking for robot on unknown terrains,” IEEE
                                                                               [43] Y. Hou, Z. Liu, C. Chi, E. Cousineau, N. Kuppuswamy, S. Feng,
     Transactions on Robotics, vol. 41, pp. 1404–1420, 2025.
                                                                             B.  Burchfiel, and S. Song, “Adaptive compliance  policy: Learning
[25]  S.  Shaw,  B.  Abbatematteo,  and  G.  Konidaris, “Rmps  for  safe                                                                              approximate compliance for diffusion guided control,” in 2025 IEEE
     impedance  control  in  contact-rich  manipulation,”  2022.  [Online].                                                                                       International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).  IEEE,
      Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.12103                                                                              2025, pp. 4829–4836.
[26] A. S. Anand, J. T. Gravdahl, and F. J. Abu-Dakka, “Model-based variable                                                                               [44] Y. Park and P. Agrawal, “Using apple vision pro to train and control
     impedance learning control for robotic manipulation,” Robotics and                                                                                          robots,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/Improbable-AI/
     Autonomous Systems, vol. 170, p. 104531, 2023. [Online]. Available:                                                                               VisionProTeleop
     https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921889023001707                                                                               [45] M. Janner, Y. Du,  J. B. Tenenbaum, and S. Levine, “Planning with
[27] Y. Michel, M. Saveriano, and D. Lee, “A novel safety-aware energy          diffusion for flexible behavior synthesis,” in Proceedings of the 39th
     tank formulation based on control barrier functions,” IEEE Robotics         International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.
     and Automation Letters, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 5206–5213, 2024.                                                                               [46] A. Nichol and P. Dhariwal, “Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic
[28]  F. Abi-Farraj, T. Osa, N. P. J. Peters, G. Neumann, and P. R. Gior-         models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09672, 2021.
     dano, “A learning-based shared control architecture for interactive task                                                                               [47]  J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
      execution,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and                                                                               arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11239, 2020.
     Automation (ICRA), 2017, pp. 329–335.                                                                               [48]  J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli,
[29] M. Najafi, K. Adams, and M. Tavakoli, “Robotic learning from demon-       “Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics,” in
      stration of therapist’s time-varying assistance to a patient in trajectory-        Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning,
     following tasks,” in International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics           ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, F. Bach and D. Blei,
     (ICORR), 2017, pp. 888–894.                                                    Eds., vol. 37.   Lille, France: PMLR, 07–09 Jul 2015, pp. 2256–2265.
[30] E. Theodorou, J. Buchli, and S. Schaal, “A generalized path integral    [49]  P. Holderrieth and E. Erives, “An introduction to flow matching and
      control approach to reinforcement learning,” The Journal of Machine          diffusion models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02070, 2025.
     Learning Research, vol. 11, pp. 3137–3181, 2010.                                                                               [50] X. Liu, K. Y. Ma, C. Gao, and M. Z. Shou, “Diffusion models in
[31] M. Kalakrishnan, S. Chitta, E. Theodorou, P. Pastor, and S. Schaal,          robotics: A survey,” TechRxiv, April 2025.
     “Stomp: Stochastic trajectory optimization for motion planning,” in 2011    [51] U. A. Mishra and Y. Chen,  “Reorientdiff: Diffusion model based
    IEEE international conference on robotics and automation. IEEE, 2011,          reorientation for object manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12700,
     pp. 4569–4574.                                                           2023.
[32]  F. Stulp, E. A. Theodorou, and S. Schaal, “Reinforcement learning    [52]  J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon, “Denoising diffusion implicit models,”
     with sequences of motion primitives for robust manipulation,” IEEE         arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
     Transactions on robotics, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 1360–1370, 2012.            [53] R. Wolf, Y. Shi, S. Liu, and R. Rayyes, “Diffusion models for robotic
[33] G. Williams, A. Aldrich, and E. A. Theodorou, “Model predictive         manipulation: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08438, 2025.
     path integral control: From theory to parallel computation,” Journal of    [54] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
     Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 344–357, 2017.          Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances
[34] Q. Yang, A. D¨urr, E. A. Topp, J. A. Stork, and T. Stoyanov, “Variable          in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 30, 2017.
     impedance skill learning for contact-rich manipulation,” IEEE Robotics    [55] Y. Liang, H. Wen, Y. Nie, Y. Jiang, M. Jin, D. Song, S. Pan, and Q. Wen,
     and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 8391–8398, 2022.                  “Foundation models for time series analysis: A tutorial and survey,”
[35] A. B. Tahmaz, R.  Prakash, and  J.  Kober, “Impedance  primitive-          in Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
     augmented hierarchical reinforcement learning for sequential tasks,”        Discovery and Data Mining, ser. KDD ’24.  ACM, Aug. 2024, p.
     2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.19607                   6555–6565.
[36] N. Hogan, “Impedance control: An approach to manipulation — part i:    [56] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai,
     Theory,” Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control, vol.          T.  Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold,  S.  Gelly,
     107, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 1985.                                                                      J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby, “An image is worth 16x16 words: Trans-
[37] C. Chi, S. Feng, Y. Du, Z. Xu, E. Cousineau, B. Burchfiel, and S. Song,         formers for image recognition at scale,” in International Conference on
     “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion,”        Learning Representations, 2021.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04137, 2023.                                   [57] A.  Jaegle,  F. Gimeno, A. Brock, O.  Vinyals, A. Zisserman, and
[38] M. Braun, N.  Jaquier, L. Rozo, and T. Asfour, “Riemannian flow            J. Carreira, “Perceiver: General perception with iterative attention,” in
     matching policy for robot motion learning,” 10 2024, pp. 5144–5151.          Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
                                                                                                                                                 17


       ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, M. Meila and T. Zhang,     For the circular peg, rotational symmetry about the end-
      Eds., vol. 139.  PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021, pp. 4651–4664.               effector  z-axis makes  the  final yaw alignment  irrelevant.
[58]  T. Wang, A. Roberts, D. Hesslow, T. L. Scao, H. W. Chung, I. Belt-
      agy,  J. Launay, and C. Raffel, “What language model architecture   Stiffness modulation is therefore dominated by translational
     and pretraining objective work best for zero-shot generalization?” in   factors, with only minor rotational adjustments. For the square
     Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning   peg, alignment with the edges increased sensitivity to off-
     (ICML), vol. 162.  PMLR, 2022, pp. 23 671–23 694.
[59]  T. Lin, Y. Wang, X. Liu, and X. Qiu, “A survey of transformers,” AI   axis contact. This yielded stronger directional reductions in
     Open, vol. 3, pp. 111–132, 2022.                               both translation and rotation when axes contributed little to
[60] A. Kramberger, E. Shahriari, A. Gams, B. Nemec, A. Ude, and S. Had-   the sZFT, while stiffness remained high along task-relevant
      dadin, “Passivity based iterative learning of admittance-coupled dynamic
                                                                     directions.    movement primitives for interaction with changing environments,” in
     2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on  Intelligent Robots and
     Systems (IROS), 2018, pp. 6023–6028.
[61] N. Hogan, “A general actuator model based on nonlinear equivalent
     networks,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
     Automation (ICRA).  IEEE, 2014, pp. 2647–2653.
[62] ——, “Impedance and interaction control,” in 2015 IEEE-RAS 15th
      International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids).   IEEE,
     2015, pp. 1–7.
[63]  J. Lachner, F. Allmendinger, E. Hobert, N. Hogan, and S. Stramigioli,                     Noah Geiger received the B.Sc. degree in Mechan-
     “Energy budgets for coordinate invariant robot control in physical hu-                                 ical Engineering and the M.Sc. degree in Mecha-
     man–robot interaction,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,                              tronics and Information Technology, with a special-
      vol. 40, no. 8-9, pp. 968–985, 2021.                                                                   ization in robotics, from the Karlsruhe Institute of
[64] A.  Albu-Schaffer, C.  Ott, U.  Frese, and G.  Hirzinger,  “Cartesian                         Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany, in 2022 and
     impedance control of redundant robots: recent results with the DLR-                          2025, respectively. He was a Visiting Researcher at
      light-weight-arms,” IEEE International Conference on Robotics and                             the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT),
     Automation, pp. 3704–3709, 2003.                                                         Cambridge, MA, USA. He was awarded an Engi-
[65] K. Shoemake, “Animating rotation with quaternion curves,” SIGGRAPH                            neering Scholarship from ERGO Direkt AG and an
     Comput. Graph., vol. 19, no. 3, p. 245–254, Jul. 1985.                                       IT Scholarship from Festo GmbH & Co. KG during
[66]  S. Schaal, “Is imitation learning the route to humanoid robots?” Trends                              his studies, as well as the DPG Abiturpreis. He
      in cognitive sciences, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 233–242, 1999.                 began his professional experience as a Student Assistant at KIT, working
[67] A.  J. Ijspeert,  J. Nakanishi, H. Hoffmann, P. Pastor, and S. Schaal,   on human pose estimation, and as a Working Student and Bachelor’s Can-
     “Dynamical movement primitives: learning attractor models for motor    didate with Schaeffler, Karlsruhe, Germany, where he worked on machine
      behaviors,” Neural computation, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 328–373, 2013.       learning for vehicle control systems. He then worked as a Data Scientist
[68] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake,   with Mercedes-Benz, Sindelfingen, Germany, focusing on scene understanding
     and S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action   and end-to-end neural networks for autonomous driving, and as a Robotics
      diffusion,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, 2024.        Engineer with Bosch, Plymouth, MI, USA, where he implemented a mobile
[69] C. M. Bishop, “Training with noise is equivalent to tikhonov regular-    robot system for radar sensor validation. Since October 2025, he has been with
      ization,” Neural Computation, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 108–116, 01 1995.        the Junior Managers Program (AI/IT Track), Robert Bosch GmbH, Stuttgart,
[70]  J. Lachner,  F.  Tessari, A. M. W.  Jr., M. C. Nah, and N. Hogan,   Germany, a program that prepares participants for leadership responsibility.
     “Divide et impera: Decoding impedance strategies for robotic peg-in-   His research interests include robotics, agentic AI, diffusion models, and
     hole assembly,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.01054, 2025.                  physical AI. Mr. Geiger is Founder and Lead of the Studopolis Think Tank
[71]  J. Carvalho, A. T. Le, M. Baierl, D. Koert, and  J. Peters, “Motion   and was previously a Member of the Board of MIT VISTA.
     planning diffusion: Learning and planning of robot motions with diffu-
     sion models,” in 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
     Robots and Systems (IROS), 2023, pp. 1916–1923.
[72]  J. Lachner, M. C. Nah, S. Stramigioli, and N. Hogan, “Exp [licit] an ed-
      ucational robot modeling software based on exponential maps,” in 2024
    IEEE International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics
     (AIM).  IEEE, 2024, pp. 1359–1366.
[73]  J. Lachner, M. C. Nah, F. Tessari, and N. Hogan, “Elementary dynamic
      actions: key structures for contact-rich manipulation,” in IROS 2023
     Workshop on Leveraging Models for Contact-Rich Manipulation, 2023.                    Tamim Asfour (Fellow, IEEE)  is Full Professor
[74] D. E. Whitney,  “Quasi-Static Assembly  of Compliantly Supported                            of Humanoid Robotics  at Karlsruhe  Institute  of
     Rigid  Parts,”  Journal  of  Dynamic  Systems,  Measurement,  and                         Technology (KIT), Germany. He directs the High
      Control,  vol. 104, no.  1, pp. 65–77, 03 1982. [Online]. Available:                         Performance Humanoid Technologies Lab (H2T) at
      https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3149634                                                                   the Institute of Anthropomatics and Robotics. He
[75]  S. Hirai and K. Tanie, “Remote center compliance with adaptive com-                            received a diploma in Electrical Engineering from
      pliance control,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference                             the University of Karlsruhe and a Ph.D. degree
     on Robotics and Automation.  IEEE, 1990, pp. 468–473.                                    from KIT. His research focuses on the engineering
                                                                                       humanoid robot systems that integrates artificial in-
                                                                                                                   telligence, informatics, and mechatronics to perform
                  APPENDIX A                                                                versatile tasks in the real world while learning from
                                                                     humans, experience and interaction with the environment. Tamim  is the
            PEG-IN-HOLE EXPERIMENTS                                                                            developer of the ARMAR humanoid robot family. He has been a visiting
  This appendix complements the main results by reporting    professor at Georgia Tech, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology,
                                                                     and the National University of Singapore. He is a IEEE Fellow, Editor-in-Chief
stiffness adaptation for the  circular and square pegs. The    of the Robotics and Automation Letters (RA-L), Founding Editor-in-Chief of
corresponding results for the star peg are already presented in    the IEEE-RAS Humanoids Conference Editorial Board, the Spokesperson of
the main text (Figure 11). The experimental setup, controllers,    the Robotics Institute Germany (RIG), and the scientific spokesperson of the
                                                           KIT Center “Information · Systems · Technologies” (KCIST).
and parameters matched  the main  text:  baseline  stiffness
Kt,i,max = 800 N/m and Kr,i,max = 150 Nm/rad, damping as
in Appendix II-B1, and force/moment thresholds of 1 N and
1 Nm. All quantities are expressed in the robot base frame.

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
                                                                                                                                                 18





Fig. 12: Cylindrical peg insertion with stiffness adaptation. External wrenches, commanded translational and rotational stiffness,
and relative motion factors are shown in the robot base frame. Base-frame color coding is given in Figure 9.



                         Neville Hogan (Member, IEEE)  is Sun Jae Pro-                        Johannes Lachner (Member, IEEE) is an incom-
                          fessor of Mechanical Engineering and Professor of                            ing  Assistant Professor with  the Elmore Family
                       Brain and Cognitive Sciences at the Massachusetts                         School of Electrical and Computer Engineering at
                            Institute of Technology. He earned a Diploma in                         Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. He is
                       Engineering (with distinction) from Dublin Institute                             currently a Postdoctoral Researcher with the De-
                         of Technology and M.S., Mechanical Engineer and                           partment of Mechanical Engineering and the De-
                       Ph.D. degrees from MIT. He joined MIT’s faculty in                           partment of Brain and Cognitive Sciences  at the
                     1979 and presently directs the Newman Laboratory                           Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). He
                          for Biomechanics and Human Rehabilitation. He                            received the M.Eng. double degree (with distinction)
                       co-founded Interactive Motion Technologies, subse-                              in Mechatronic Systems from  the  University  of
                        quently part of Bionik Laboratories. His research                               Ulster, Belfast, UK, and the University of Applied
includes robotics, motor neuroscience, and rehabilitation engineering, empha-   Sciences Augsburg, Germany, and the Ph.D. degree (with highest distinction)
sizing the control of physical contact and dynamic interaction. Awards include:    in Robotics from the University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands. Prior
Honorary Doctorates from Delft University of Technology and Dublin Institute    to MIT, he was a Senior Research Engineer with the Corporate Research
of Technology; the Silver Medal of the Royal Academy of Medicine in   Department, KUKA Robotics GmbH, where he invented numerous patents
Ireland; the Saint Patrick’s Day Medal for Academia from Science Foundation    in robotics, several of which have been transferred into commercial products.
Ireland; the Henry M. Paynter Outstanding Investigator Award and the Rufus   His research focuses on rehabilitation robotics, motor neuroscience, and AI for
T. Oldenburger Medal from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers,    physical human–robot interaction, with an emphasis on geometric methods for
Dynamic Systems and Control Division; and from the Institute of Electrical    contact-rich robot control and robot learning from human physical interaction.
and Electronics Engineers, the Academic Career Achievement Award from   He received the MIT–Novo Nordisk AI Fellowship Award, the IROS Best
the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society and the Pioneer in Robotics   Paper Award 2024, and two consecutive TU Munich Global Incentive Fund
Award from the Robotics and Automation Society.                            awards. He was a finalist for the European Georges Giralt Ph.D. Award for
                                                                                 the best European Ph.D. thesis in robotics.

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
                                                                                                                                                 19





Fig. 13: Square peg insertion with stiffness adaptation. External wrenches, commanded translational and rotational stiffness,
and relative motion factors are shown in the robot base frame. Base-frame color coding is given in Figure 9.