=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
1
Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning for
Contact-Rich Manipulation Tasks
Noah Geiger, Tamim Asfour, Neville Hogan and Johannes Lachner
Abstract—Learning-based methods excel at robot motion gen-
eration but remain limited in contact-rich physical interaction.
Impedance control provides stable and safe contact behavior but
requires task-specific tuning of stiffness and damping parameters.
We present Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning, a framework
that bridges these paradigms by combining generative modeling
with energy-consistent impedance control. A Transformer-based
Diffusion Model, conditioned via cross-attention on measured ex-
ternal wrenches, reconstructs simulated Zero-Force Trajectories
(sZFTs) that represent contact-consistent equilibrium behavior.
A SLERP-based quaternion noise scheduler preserves geometric
consistency for rotations on the unit sphere. The reconstructed
sZFT is used by an energy-based estimator to adapt impedance
online through directional stiffness and damping modulation.
Trained on parkour and robot-assisted therapy demonstrations
collected via Apple Vision Pro teleoperation, the model achieves
sub-millimeter positional and sub-degree rotational accuracy
using only tens of thousands of samples. Deployed in real-
time torque control on a KUKA LBR iiwa, the approach
enables smooth obstacle traversal and generalizes to unseen tasks,
achieving 100% success in multi-geometry peg-in-hole insertion.
The code for all experiments is publicly available on GitHub and
videos of the experiments are available on the project website.
Index Terms—Imitation learning, Diffusion Models, Physical
interaction, Impedance Control
I. INTRODUCTION
Robotic behavior arises from the interaction of two funda-
mentally different domains. On the one hand, motion planning
and learning algorithms are based on data processing and
operate on symbolic or numerical representations of virtual
desired behavior, such as trajectories, poses, or task objectives.
These representations are processed unidirectionally and are
constrained only by temporal causality (“no output before in-
put”) and boundedness. They are not subject to physical laws.
In this paper, we refer to this as the information domain [1].
Physical interaction with the environment, on the other
hand, is governed by bidirectional behavior. It is constrained
by physical laws like energy conservation, entropy production,
gravity, etc. In this paper, we refer to this as the energy
domain [1]. Ignoring these physical constraints will yield
robot control problems with stability (passivity) [2], [3] and
safety [4].
N. Geiger and T. Asfour are with the Institute for Anthropomatics and
Robotics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany; e-mail:
noah.geiger@student.kit.edu, asfour@kit.edu
N. Geiger, N. Hogan, and J. Lachner are with the Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA; N.
Hogan, and J. Lachner are also with the and Department of Brain and
Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA;
e-mail: ngeiger@mit.edu, neville@mit.edu, jlachner@mit.edu
Robots operating in contact-rich and unstructured environ-
ments must bridge these two domains: desired motions must
be inferred and represented in the information domain, yet
executed through control algorithms that take into account
energy exchange with the environment. This requirement is
critical in assembly, robot-assisted rehabilitation, and other
contact-rich tasks where visual feedback may be limited and
task success depends on regulating physical interaction rather
than simply following a path.
The relation between motion planning (information domain)
and physical interaction (energy domain) is well described by
mechanical impedance [5]–[7]. Impedance Control has been
widely adopted to guarantee stability [5] and safety [4] for
robots that go in and out of contact. The separation of both
domains can be formalized by equivalent networks, a gen-
eralization of the equivalent-circuit concept [8], to represent
nonlinear dynamics and arbitrarily complex physical networks
as a combination of primitives [9]–[11].
While Impedance Control provides a powerful framework
for shaping robot–environment interaction [9], its effectiveness
critically depends on the choice of stiffness and damping pa-
rameters [12]. Too much stiffness can lead to jamming, while
too little can prevent task execution. Selecting these parameters
is typically an iterative and time-consuming process, as current
physics-based simulation tools are not yet sufficiently accurate
or reliable to support fully offline tuning [13].
Recent advances in contact-rich manipulation can be di-
vided into three main strands: 1) model-based approaches,
2) statistical-impedance heuristics, and 3) learning-based ap-
proaches.
Model-based approaches incorporate explicit contact dy-
namics including friction cones, complementarity constraints,
and mixed-integer formulations [14]–[27]. These methods
produce behavior consistent with physical contact but face
challenges: high computational cost, parameter sensitivity, and
limited robustness in unstructured settings. Most approaches
require task-specific tuning of parameters. The selected con-
trol gains typically do not generalize across environments
and tasks. Consequently, these approaches are not ideal for
unstructured environments with unknown contact dynamics.
These limitations motivate the development of learning-based
frameworks capable of inferring and adapting stiffness online
from observed interaction data.
Between explicit physics-based models and fully learning-
based policies, a class of statistical-impedance heuristics have
emerged within the learning-from-demonstration literature.
These approaches typically model demonstrated motions using
probabilistic representations such as Gaussian Mixture Mod-
arXiv:2509.19696v4
[cs.RO]
11
Aug
2026

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
2
els, where the mean trajectory defines the nominal motion and
the covariance is interpreted as a measure of task relevance or
confidence [28], [29]. Impedance parameters are then mod-
ulated heuristically based on this statistical variability, with
higher stiffness assigned to directions of low variance. These
approaches have shown to be effective for structured tasks
with consistent geometry. However, these methods are still
limited in contact-rich settings where changing environmental
constraints are not reflected in the statistical variability of the
demonstrations.
Learning-based approaches, in contrast, primarily oper-
ate in the information domain. Reinforcement learning and
sampling-based optimization methods [30]–[35] can achieve
context-aware behavior, but typically lack an explicit represen-
tation of impedance, which prescribes a bidirectional relation-
ship between motion and generalized force [36]. Instead, these
methods rely on reward functions that penalize either force or
position deviations. As a result, they tend to converge toward
admittance-like behaviors that suppress interaction forces or
motion deviations, rather than explicitly regulating impedance.
More recent generative approaches, including diffusion poli-
cies [37], flow-matching policies [38], [39], and Transformer-
based policy models [40], [41], have demonstrated impressive
performance in motion generation across tasks and embod-
iments [42]. However, these methods primarily focus on
trajectory generation and are typically executed through PD
controllers with fixed proportional and derivative gains to
maintain stability during contact. Compliance in such systems
is therefore not explicitly controlled but emerges indirectly
through low control gains. While this strategy can prevent
hardware damage, it provides limited control over physical
interaction behavior in contact-rich or safety-critical scenarios
where deliberate impedance modulation is essential.
This paper addresses this gap by formulating impedance
adaptation as an equilibrium reconstruction problem rather
than a trajectory learning problem. We present Diffusion-Based
Impedance Learning, a framework that integrates generative
modeling with energy-consistent impedance control. While
the robot moves on a fixed nominal Zero-Force Trajectory
(ZFT)1
, a conditional Transformer-based Diffusion Model
reconstructs a simulated Zero-Force Trajectory (sZFT) from
contact-perturbed motion and measured interaction wrenches.
The reconstructed sZFT represents an inferred equilibrium that
is consistent with the observed physical interaction and serves
as the reference for impedance modulation. A directional
adaptation scheme selectively reduces stiffness along non-task-
relevant directions while preserving rigidity along directions
essential for task execution.
Other work, in addition to that presented here, has also
begun to combine generative models with compliant control
for contact-rich manipulation. The Adaptive Compliance Pol-
icy (ACP) [43] shares several conceptual similarities with
the present work, but differs in sensing modality, demon-
stration paradigm, controller architecture, and the role of
the inferred equilibrium. ACP combines visual observations,
1The Zero-Force Trajectory (ZFT), introduced by Hogan [12], refers to the
commanded equilibrium motion in the unconstrained case: the unique end-
effector pose at which the interaction wrench vanishes.
force sensing, and compliant kinesthetic teaching to directly
predict compliance-related quantities for a low-level con-
troller. In contrast, our approach operates solely on robot
kinematics and measured interaction wrenches, reconstructing
a contact-consistent equilibrium trajectory from teleoperated
demonstrations and deriving impedance adaptation through
an energy-based estimator. Conceptually, both ACP’s Virtual
Target Pose and the proposed equilibrium reconstruction rep-
resent interaction-conditioned equilibria. However, the former
is directly tracked as a force-generating target, whereas the
latter serves as an intermediate representation for estimating
impedance adaptation while the robot continues to follow its
nominal motion reference.
In this way, our approach bridges data-driven learning and
energy-consistent control: Diffusion Models explain physi-
cal interaction by reconstructing contact-consistent equilib-
ria, while impedance control enforces stability and physical
consistency during execution. Our method operates purely on
robot kinematics and measured interaction wrenches, without
relying on visual observations.
We validated the framework on a KUKA LBR iiwa in two
contact-rich scenarios: parkour-style obstacle traversal and
multi-geometry peg-in-hole insertion. Training data were col-
lected through teleoperation using Apple Vision Pro (AVP)
equipped with a markerless pose-tracking framework [44]
integrated into the robot controller. Both tasks expose the
limitations of fixed impedance and simple adaptation schemes,
which require careful, task-specific parameter tuning and still
tend to jam at obstacles or fail to achieve insertion. In con-
trast, Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning achieves consistent
success without manual retuning.
This result is particularly noteworthy in the peg-in-hole
experiments, as the Diffusion Model was not trained on this
task. Despite the absence of peg-in-hole demonstrations during
training, the system achieved a 100% success rate across
all peg geometries. This generalization was obtained using
only 1.6 hours of teleoperated training data (72,000 samples).
The results summarized in Table I underscore the central
contribution of this work: robust contact-rich manipulation in
unstructured environments requires explicitly bridging learn-
ing in the information domain with control in the energy
domain.
The code for the Transformer-based Diffusion Model, the
robot controller, and the Apple Vision Pro teleoperation frame-
work is available in our GitHub repository. Demonstration
videos of all experiments can be found on the project website.
II. PRELIMINARIES
First, we outline the process in both domains: Transformer-
based diffusion in the information domain and energy-based
Impedance Control in the energy domain.
A. Diffusion Models
Diffusion Models learn to sample from a data distribution by
approximating the reverse-time dynamics of a Gaussian diffu-
sion process [45]. Let {zi}N
i=1 be independent and identically
distributed samples from the data distribution pdata; the goal is

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
3
TABLE I: Preview of experimental outcomes (full details in Section IV). Fixed impedance fails in contact-rich tasks, while
Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning achieves robust success by reconstructing a contact-consistent sZFT.
Controller Parkour Cylindrical Peg Square Peg Star Peg
Fixed impedance × (stopped at first obstacle) 100% 13% 0%
Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning ✓ (smooth traversal) 100% 100% 100%
to learn a parametric family of distributions {pθ}θ∈Θ such that
pθ ≈ pdata. A forward Markov chain maps a clean sample z0
to (approximately) N(0, I) over T steps. The learned reverse-
time chain iteratively denoises zt to produce a sample that
approximates pdata (Figure 1).
1) Forward Diffusion: The forward diffusion process de-
fines a Markov chain with Gaussian transitions
q(zt | zt−1) = N(
√
αt zt−1, (1 − αt) I) , (1)
where αt := 1−βt and {βt}T
t=1 ⊂ (0, 1) is a predefined noise
schedule. The quantity (1 − αt) = βt is the per-step diffusion
variance, which controls the signal-to-noise ratio across time.
After T steps with ᾱT :=
QT
i=1 αi ≈ 0, the marginal distribu-
tion approaches a standard normal distribution , zT ≈ N(0, I).
The marginal distribution at step t has the closed form
q(zt | z0) = N
√
ᾱt z0, (1 − ᾱt) I

, (2)
which admits the equivalent reparameterization
zt =
√
ᾱt z0 +
√
1 − ᾱt ε, ε ∼ N(0, I). (3)
2) Noise Schedule: The per-step variances {βt}T
t=1 define
the noise schedule, which controls how the signal-to-noise
ratio SNRt = ᾱt/(1 − ᾱt) decays from ∞ to 0 over time.
A well-chosen schedule balances the complexity of denoising,
keeping early steps near-deterministic and later steps close to
pure noise. [46], [47]
3) Reverse Process and Learning Objective: The true re-
verse q(zt−1 | zt) is intractable, as it marginalizes over z0.
However, since the forward chain is linear–Gaussian, the
posterior q(zt−1 |zt, z0) is itself Gaussian with mean µ̃t(zt, z0)
and variance β̃tI [48]. The model represents pθ(zt−1 | zt) =
N(µθ(zt, t), Σθ(zt, t)) and fit θ by minimizing the variational
bound
P
t DKL q(zt−1 | zt, z0) ∥ pθ(zt−1 | zt)

. With the ε-
parameterization,
µθ(zt, t) =
1
√
αt

zt −
βt
√
1 − ᾱt
εθ(zt, t)

,
and zt =
√
ᾱtz0 +
√
1 − ᾱt ε, the objective reduces (up to
constants) to the noise-prediction loss [47]:
Lsimple(θ) = Et,z0,ε
h
ε − εθ
√
ᾱtz0 +
√
1 − ᾱt ε, t
 2
2
i
.
4) Training and Inference Algorithms: Training follows a
noise-prediction objective: at each iteration, a clean sample
z0 ∼ pdata, a timestep t ∈ {1, . . . , T} (uniform), and Gaussian
noise ε ∼ N(0, I) are sampled. The closed-form forward
diffusion produces zt, then the network εθ is updated to mini-
mize mean-squared error between ε and its prediction εθ(zt, t)
[47], [49]. At inference, generation starts from zT ∼ N(0, I)
and applies the learned reverse transitions pθ(zt−1 | zt) for
t=T, . . . , 1, yielding z0 as a sample from the model [47].
For robotic trajectory generation, this iterative denoising maps
pure noise into trajectories that are consistent with task goals
(Figure 1).
5) Conditional Diffusion: To generate task-consistent be-
havior, the denoising process is conditioned on an additional
context variable c (e. g., goals, scene state, or interaction
wrench). The reverse model and noise predictor then become
pθ(zt−1 |zt, c) and εθ(zt, t, c).
Conditioning can be implemented in several ways, includ-
ing (i) early fusion (e. g., feature concatenation), (ii) cross-
attention over context tokens for Transformer denoisers, or
(iii) lightweight fusion layers [50], [51].
In our approach, conditional diffusion is central. By condi-
tioning on external wrenches, the model reconstructs sZFTs
that are consistent with physical interaction. This ties the de-
noising process in the information domain to the regulation of
interaction in the energy domain. More details about Diffusion
Models can be found in [47], [49], [52], [53].
6) Transformer-based Diffusion Model: In this paper,
we choose a Transformer-based denoising network since
robotic trajectories are time series with context-dependent
effects (e. g., contact events with delayed consequences).
Self-attention provides a content-based global receptive field
and fully parallelizable training, which is advantageous over
Recurrent or Convolutional Neural Networks for sequence
modeling [41], [54].
At each diffusion step, pose tokens are formed from trans-
lations and unit-quaternions. These tokens are embedded and
enriched with learned positional and timestep embeddings.
Interaction signals (forces and moments) are projected to
context tokens and integrated through a multi-head cross-
attention layer. Here, trajectory tokens serve as queries while
context tokens serve as keys and values. The combined
sequence is then processed by stacked self-attention and
feed-forward layers, and a lightweight Multi-layer Perceptron
(MLP) head predicts the 7D noise (3D translations and 4D
unit-quaternions) for each token. This architecture captures
temporal structure while conditioning on interaction signals, a
requirement that is central for contact-rich applications [54]–
[59]. More details about Transformer-based models can be
found in [53], [54], [58], [59].
B. Energy-based Impedance Control
Impedance Control regulates the dynamic relationship be-
tween motion and interaction wrenches. Rather than com-
manding exact positions, the robot behaves like a virtual
mechanical system characterized by stiffness, damping, and

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
4
inertia2
. In contrast to admittance control3
, the impedance
formulation enables the robot to maintain compliance while
ensuring stability when interacting with passive environments
[6], [36], [61], [62].
From an energy perspective, Impedance Control transforms
the potential energy stored in a virtual spring to the work done
by external wrenches [63]. Let the pose displacement be
∆x =

et
er

∈ se(3), (4a)
et := p − p0 ∈ R3
, (4b)
er := log Q0Q−1

∈ R3
≃ so(3). (4c)
where the observed pose is (p, Q) ∈ R3
× S3
and the
equilibrium pose is (p0, Q0) ∈ R3
× S3
. Any unit quaternion
admits the unit axis–angle representation
Q = cos(θ
2 ), u sin(θ
2 )

, ∥u∥ = 1, θ ∈ [0, π]. (5)
In this formulation, the logarithm map is applied to the error
quaternion Q0Q−1
to return the axis–angle error vector er =
u0 θ0.
Let Kt, Kr ∈ R3×3
be diagonal, positive semidefinite
translational and rotational stiffness matrices and K =
diag(Kt, Kr). Define the potential energy
U(∆x) = 1
2 e⊤
t Ktet + 1
2 e⊤
r Krer ∈ R≥0. (6)
The elastic wrench Felastic ∈ se∗
(3) can then be derived from
the gradient
Felastic =
∂U
∂∆x
=

felastic
melastic

, (7)
with felastic ∈ R3
and melastic ∈ R3
being the elastic force and
moment, respectively.
2And possibly higher-order dynamic effects.
3Admittance control requires additional methods to guarantee passivity [60].
1) Damping design: The damping design was formulated
to ensure that energy dissipation scales consistently with both
the commanded stiffness K{t,r} and the task-space inertia
for translations and rotations Λ{t,r} ∈ R3×3
. To account
for numerical issues near singular configurations, Λ{t,r} was
computed using a damped least-squares method [2].
A user-selected positive time constant d > 0 defines the
diagonal damping ratio matrix
D{t,r} = d I3. (8)
The symmetric positive semidefinite square roots
p
Λ{t,r} and
p
K{t,r} are obtained by eigendecomposition for Λ{t,r} and
elementwise for K{t,r}. As presented in [64], an intermediate
damping matrix B{t,r} is constructed as
B{t,r} =
q
Λ{t,r} D{t,r}
q
K{t,r}
+
q
K{t,r} D{t,r}
q
Λ{t,r}.
(9)
From B{t,r}, a scalar damping coefficient is computed to
normalize the dissipation relative to the overall stiffness:
λ{t,r} =
2 tr(B{t,r})
tr(K{t,r})
=
2 tr(B{t,r})
kx + ky + kz
. (10)
Finally, the damping matrices can be expressed as
Bt = λt Kt, (11)
for translation and
Br = λr Kr, (12)
for rotation.
2) Control Force: The force fctrl ∈ R3
is composed of
felastic and damping through matrix Bt ∈ R3×3
that acts on the
end-effector translational velocity ṗ ∈ R3
. It can be calculated
as
fctrl = felastic − Bt ṗ. (13)
Fig. 1: Diffusion overview. Bottom: dashed arrows depict the forward process q(zt | zt−1) which gradually corrupts a clean
trajectory z0. Top: solid arrows depict the reverse process pθ(zt−1 | zt) which is learned to reconstruct structured robotic
behavior. Figure adapted from [45].

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
5
3) Control Moment: The moment mctrl ∈ R3
is composed
of melastic and damping through matrix Br ∈ R3×3
that acts
on the angular velocity of the end-effector ω ∈ so(3). It can
be calculated as
mctrl = melastic − Br ω. (14)
4) Control Torque: Finally, the transpose of the Jacobian
J(q) : Rn
→ se(3) provides the mapping between the 6-
dimensional wrenches and the commanded joint torques τctrl ∈
Rn
:
τctrl = J(q)T

fctrl
mctrl

. (15)
In addition to the control wrench, the environment con-
tributes external wrenches Fext ∈ se∗
(3).
The controller implemented in this paper can be found in
our Github repository.
5) Norton Equivalent Network: The Impedance Control
framework can be illustrated by the Norton Equivalent Net-
work [6], [9], as represented in Figure 2. Here, two sources
interact to manage physical interaction:
• The motion source, which represents a sequence of equi-
librium poses {p0, Q0} that together form the ZFT.
• The impedance source, which represents the baseline
stiffness K.
The motion source is part of the information domain. For
contact-rich manipulation, it is a virtual nominal trajectory
that lies beyond the physical constraints imposed by the
environment. Impedance couples the motion source in the
information domain to the energy domain (energy exchange
through F and {ṗ, ω}), a key property that we exploit later
for energy-based stiffness estimation (Section III-E).
III. DIFFUSION-BASED IMPEDANCE LEARNING
A. Diffusion Model for Reconstruction of sZFT
From the perspective of diffusion, the displacement ∆x
can be interpreted as noise corrupting the equilibrium pose
(p0, Q0). The role of the Diffusion Model is to reconstruct
the equilibrium pose by iteratively removing this noise. During
training, the model learns to predict the difference between the
observed pose (p, Q) and the ground truth equilibrium pose,
guided by the measured external wrench Fext (Figure 3). At in-
ference, the model denoises ∆x and outputs the reconstructed
sZFT (p̂0, Q̂0).
Throughout this paper, all quantities denoted by a hat (ˆ
· )
are predictions of the Diffusion Model and correspond to the
sZFT.
It is important to distinguish between the nominal ZFT
(p0, Q0) and the reconstructed sZFT (p̂0, Q̂0) in our for-
mulation. The ZFT represents the programmed nominal mo-
tion reference and remains fixed during execution. In this
work, ZFTs were generated programmatically by chaining
waypoints using minimum-jerk interpolation and Spherical
Linear Interpolation (SLERP) [65]. More generally, ZFTs can
also be obtained through frame-based programming, imitation
learning for free-space motion [66], [67], or teleoperation [68].
A video of the demonstrations is available on the project
website and the code for ZFT generation is publicly available
on GitHub.
The sZFT, in contrast, is reconstructed online by the diffu-
sion model from measured end-effector motion and interaction
wrenches. It provides a denoised estimate of the equilibrium
trajectory that explains the observed interaction. During de-
ployment, the robot continues to track the nominal ZFT as the
commanded motion reference, while the reconstructed sZFT
is used exclusively for impedance adaptation. Specifically,
the elastic energy in the virtual springs and external work
exchanged with the environment (Equations (24) - (25)) are
computed with respect to the reconstructed sZFT, enabling
online estimation of stiffness and damping consistent with the
observed contact behavior. In this way, the diffusion model
does not directly generate impedance, but instead infers the
interaction-consistent equilibrium underlying the impedance
controller.
For example, when the robot encounters an unexpected
obstacle, the planned ZFT drives the end-effector into contact,
producing an external wrench. Conditioned on this wrench, the
Diffusion Model reconstructs the sZFT and updates the con-
trolled impedance. An illustration of the difference between
ZFT and sZFT can be seen in Figure 4.
Having illustrated the effect conceptually, we now formalize
the denoising process, which can be expressed in translational
and rotational noise components. For translations, the full
noise is defined as
pnoise = p − p0. (16)
During training, a fraction of this noise is added to the clean
equilibrium pose via the noise scheduler (Section III-B), and
the network is trained to predict it. At inference, the predicted
noise p̂noise is subtracted from the observation to reconstruct
the equilibrium position iteratively,
p̂0 = p − p̂noise. (17)
For rotations, the full noise is represented by the relative
quaternion
Qnoise = Q Q−1
0 , (18)
which encodes the rotational displacement between the ob-
served quaternion Q and the equilibrium quaternion Q0.
Partial training noise is injected to Q0 using SLERP [65]
(Section III-B), and the network is trained to predict Q̂noise.
At inference, the equilibrium quaternion is reconstructed by
Q̂0 = Q Q̂−1
noise. (19)
The reconstructed sZFT provides the key link between the
Diffusion Model and impedance adaptation. It serves as the
input for the energy-based stiffness estimation described in
Section III-E.
B. Noise Scheduling
For the denoising process, the maximum noise magnitude
was computed separately for translations and rotations, and a
variational noise schedule was applied across diffusion steps.

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
6
Potential Energy 𝒰
{𝒑, 𝑸}
𝑭 =
𝜕𝒰
𝜕Δ𝒙
𝑱𝑻(𝒒)
𝑱(𝒒)
Impedance
source:
𝑲
𝒑", 𝑸"
Δ𝐱
−
𝝉
𝒒̇
Environment
Motion
source:
!
{𝒑̇ , 𝝎}
Energy domain
Information domain
Fig. 2: Norton equivalent network to represent physical interaction as the combination of a virtual motion source and an
impedance source. The displacement ∆x is coupled to stiffness K to generate wrench.
𝑭!"#
𝒑, 𝑸
noise
Diffusion Model
Fig. 3: Diffusion-based reconstruction of the simulated Zero-
Force Trajectory (sZFT). The observed pose {p, Q} together
with the external wrench Fext is treated as noise relative to
the equilibrium {p0, Q0}. The Diffusion Model iteratively
denoises this input to reconstruct the equilibrium trajectory,
which is then used in energy-based stiffness estimation.
1) Translations: For translations, the deviation between the
observed end-effector position p and the ground-truth ZFT p0
was treated as noise. Additional zero-mean Gaussian noise
ϵgauss ∼ N(0, σ2
I) was injected during training to improve
generalization and prevent overfitting [69]. The translational
noise for the model was defined as
noiset = p − p0 + ϵgauss, (20)
with perturbed positions computed as
pnoise = p0 + βt · noiset, (21)
where βt is the noise scaling factor at diffusion step t.
2) Rotations: In our robot controller, orientations are rep-
resented with unit quaternions Q. Injecting noise, as in the
translational case, would violate the unit-norm constraint and
distort the geometry of rotations. To address this, we introduce
a SLERP-based [65] noise scheduler that perturbs quaternions
directly on the unit sphere. This approach preserves valid
orientations, provides perturbations consistent with geodesics,
and allows rotational noise to be scheduled smoothly across
diffusion steps. To our best knowledge, this is the first
physically-consistent noise scheduler for rotations in robotics,
formulated directly on a global representation of rotations [6].
The SLERP process is illustrated in Figure 5. The interpo-
lation between two quaternions Qa and Qb is defined as
SLERP(Qa, Qb; µ) =
sin((1 − µ)Ω)
sin(Ω)
Qa
+
sin(µΩ)
sin(Ω)
Qb.
(22)
𝑍𝐹𝑇(𝒑!, 𝑸!) 𝑠𝑍𝐹𝑇(𝒑
*!, 𝑸
+!)
{𝑊}
{𝐸𝐸}
Fig. 4: Illustration of the nominal Zero-Force Trajectory during
deployment (ZFT, light blue) and the reconstructed simulated
Zero-Force Trajectory (sZFT, skin color), generated by the
Diffusion Model. The ground truth sZFT was created by
teleoperation, which tracked the wrist frame {W} and serves
as an input to the robot controller to move the end-effector
frame {EE}. In the illustration, the ZFT is just a straight
line. However, due to the external wrench during contact,
the Diffusion Model will reconstruct the sZFT to imitate the
demonstrated behavior. Autonomously, the robot will adapt its
compliant behavior through impedance to smoothly go over
the obstacle.
where Ω = arccos(⟨Qa, Qb⟩) is the angle between Qa and
Qb, and µ ∈ [0, 1] is the interpolation factor.
C. Data Collection
All training data for Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning
were collected through teleoperation using the VisionPro-
Teleop framework [44] and Apple Vision Pro (AVP), which
enabled markerless and spatially unconstrained teleoperation
without external infrastructure. The AVP continuously tracked
the operator’s hand motion in six degrees of freedom, allowing
teleoperation in free space, during contact interactions, and
throughout transitions into and out of contact (Figure 6).
Within the framework, the operator’s hand pose was repre-
sented as a homogeneous transformation matrix based on a

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
7
SLERP
𝑸𝒂
𝑸𝒊𝒏𝒕
𝑸𝒃
Ω
Fig. 5: Rotational noise scheduling with Spherical Linear
Interpolation (SLERP) [65]. Perturbed quaternions stay on the
unit sphere, enabling geometry-consistent noise injection and
removal.
27-joint kinematic hand model. In our implementation, the
handMiddleFingerKnuckle (index 11) was used as the
primary keypoint for translation and rotation tracking. During
teleoperation, the tracked wrist pose served as the commanded
ZFT and was subsequently treated as the ground-truth sZFT
for model training. In parallel, external interaction wrenches at
the robot end-effector were recorded using a force/torque sen-
sor. Pose data were transferred via shared memory between the
Python-based VisionProTeleop framework and the C++ robot
controller. The implementation of the teleoperation interface
is publicly available in our GitHub repository.
Unlike demonstrations with manipulandums and haptic in-
terfaces, the AVP framework allowed spatially unrestricted
teleoperation. In practice, the operator’s hand pose tracked by
AVP could move freely in space, unconstrained by physical
objects, whereas the robot end-effector was constrained by
the actual contact surfaces. Therefore, the shift between the
commanded ZFT and the robot pose generated an external
wrench.
Two datasets were generated. The first consisted of a
parkour-style scenario with multiple obstacles (Figure 6, right).
A total of 17,457 samples were recorded. These data captured
diverse interaction behaviors, including free-space motion,
transitions into and out of contact, and sustained contact with
unknown obstacles in an unstructured environment.
The second dataset focused on robotic-assisted upper-limb
rehabilitation tasks (Figure 6, left). A total of 55,838 samples
were recorded. Eight healthy adults (4 female, 4 male; age
20–64 years; height 162–192 cm; weight 64–91 kg) performed
three types of movements derived from standard post-stroke
rehabilitation protocols: (i) passive lifting, consisting of re-
peated vertical up-and-down motions of the arm; (ii) out-
of-shoulder movements, involving arm motions that include
shoulder rotation; and (iii) an activity-of-daily-living (ADL)
task, in which subjects mimicked a feeding motion by moving
the hand toward the mouth.
Each therapy type was performed under three interaction
conditions designed to elicit different levels of subject par-
ticipation: 1) passive condition: subjects were instructed to
relax their arm and allow the robot to move it without resis-
tance; 2) cooperative condition: subjects observed the motion
demonstrated by the teleoperator wearing the AVP and actively
attempted to minimize the interaction forces between their arm
and the robot hand; 3) mixed condition: subjects alternated
between relaxing their arm and actively cooperating with
the robot motion. Together, these conditions were chosen to
capture varying levels of subject participation and assistance,
providing diverse interaction behaviors for learning contact-
consistent impedance adaptation.
The study was approved by MIT’s Committee on the Use of
Humans as Experimental Subjects (COUHES), with informed
consent obtained from all participants. This dataset was used
to train the model presented in this paper; however, the
deployment of upper-limb rehabilitation applications is part
of a separate project and is not reported here.
The desired compliant robot behavior was chosen during
the data collection phase and kept unchanged during the
deployment phase (Section IV). For all trials, the baseline
translational stiffness was set to 800 N
m , and the baseline
rotational stiffness was set to 150 Nm
rad .
D. Model Selection to Reconstruct sZFT
The model selection was guided by two initial requirements:
(i) sufficient accuracy in reconstructing both translational and
rotational components and (ii) a small model capacity, suitable
for real-time deployment. To evaluate this trade-off, we varied
hidden dimensions, number of layers, attention heads, and
loss-weighting strategies.
Performance was assessed using translational error (posi-
tional loss in mm) and rotational error (angular magnitude θ
about unit-axis and unit-axis deviation α in degrees).
Figure 7 provides a graphical representation of the rotational
losses, illustrating the decomposition into axis deviation αerror
and magnitude error θerror.
The initial requirements were 2 mm for the translational
error and 2.8◦
(half of the small-angle approximation) for the
angular error and unit-axis deviation. These values were deter-
mined heuristically based on previous contact-rich experiments
[70].
Table II reports the results for the Transformer-based Diffu-
sion Model on the parkour dataset. The configuration with 512
hidden dimensions, 4 attention heads, and 6 layers achieved the
best balance between accuracy and efficiency, with positional
error of 0.994 mm, θ error of 0.249◦
, and α error of 0.003◦
. In-
creasing the loss weight of the θ component (factor 5) yielded
marginal improvements in rotational accuracy (θ = 0.240◦
,
α = 0.003◦
) without degrading translational fidelity.
A notable result was that retraining this model on a com-
bined dataset of parkour and robotic-assisted therapy motions–
two completely different physical interaction tasks–further
improved accuracy (positional error 0.883 mm, θ error 0.233◦
,
α error 0.002◦
). Importantly, the two datasets were collected
with different tools and inertial properties (lightweight tool for
parkour and a 600 g prosthetic hand for physical therapy) yet
the model compensated for these differences without explicit
training. This robustness highlights the ability of Diffusion-
Based Impedance Learning to generalize across different tasks
and tool inertial properties on a single robot platform. The
selected architecture was ultimately adopted as the final model
because it satisfied the accuracy requirements while remaining
small enough for real-time torque control.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
8
Fig. 6: Examples of teleoperated demonstrations used for training. (Left) Physical therapy dataset with robotic-assisted upper-
limb tasks. (Right) Parkour dataset with free-space and contact-rich motions across obstacles.
TABLE II: Transformer-based Diffusion Model results (parkour dataset). The selected model (highlighted) combines high
accuracy with low computational complexity.
Hidden Dim Heads Layers θ Loss [deg] α Loss [deg] Positional Loss [mm]
512 4 4 0.307 0.004 1.047
512 4 6 0.249 0.003 0.994
512 8 4 0.282 0.004 1.030
512 8 6 0.286 0.003 0.989
1024 4 4 0.228 0.003 1.033
1024 4 6 0.224 0.003 1.033
1024 8 4 0.227 0.003 1.016
1024 8 6 0.288 0.004 1.057
Fig. 7: Graphical representation of rotational losses, showing
axis deviation αerror and magnitude error θerror.
Another notable finding of this work is the small amount
of training data required. The model already showed strong
performance on the parkour dataset with only tens of thou-
sands of samples (17,000 samples). For the combined data
set, 72,000 samples at a controller rate of 0.005 s correspond
to just 1.6 hours of demonstration. This is in contrast to image-
based Diffusion Models, which require 100,000 samples even
for learning single manipulation skills such as block pushing
[68], [71].
E. Energy-based Stiffness Estimation
Impedance control can be interpreted as virtual springs that
pull the robot end-effector toward an equilibrium pose. When
the robot interacts with the environment, the deformation of
these virtual springs is transformed into external wrenches,
which perform mechanical work. A shift of the reconstructed
sZFT by the Diffusion Model changes the deformation, and
thus the elastic energy stored in the virtual springs. By relating
this change in elastic energy to the measured work, we can
compute the stiffness equivalent that reproduces the observed
interaction behavior.
For deployment, a user specifies baseline translational and
rotational stiffness values that define the nominal interaction
behavior. During execution, the Diffusion Model predicts
the sZFT, which represents the equilibrium pose correction,
consistent with the current interaction wrench. Rather than
modifying the nominal ZFT, we adapt the impedance by
reducing stiffness equivalent to the equilibrium reconstruction
via sZFT.
Specifically, we compute nonnegative stiffness reduction
terms k⋆
t,i and k⋆
r,i for each translational and rotational axis
i ∈ {x, y, z}. These terms are subtracted from the predefined
baseline stiffness values Kt,i,max and Kr,i,max, yielding the
effective stiffness used by the controller:
kt,i = Kt,i,max − k⋆
t,i, (23a)
kr,i = Kr,i,max − k⋆
r,i. (23b)
In our experiments, the baseline stiffness values were set de-
liberately high (Kt,i,max = 800 N/m, Kr,i,max = 150 Nm/rad).
High baseline stiffness is desirable for tasks that require
significant elastic energy storage, such as pressing or inserting
a workpiece into another. We therefore selected baseline
stiffness values that the robot can realistically render and that
are sufficient for all tasks considered. The Diffusion Model

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
9
then autonomously reduced these stiffnesses when interaction
occurred, adapting the impedance only where necessary.
1) Translations: For translations, the displacement was
defined as êt = p − p̂0. The elastic energy Et ∈ R of a
virtual translational spring is
Espring
t = 1
2 Kt∥êt∥2
. (24)
Here, ∥.∥ denotes the Euclidean norm. The work done by the
external force fext ∈ R3
along the virtual displacement êt is
given by the inner product ⟨., .⟩:
Ework
t = ⟨fext, êt⟩. (25)
Equating the right hand sites of Equation (24) with Equa-
tion (25) yields the translational stiffness contribution
k⋆
t =
2⟨fext, êt⟩
∥êt∥2
. (26)
To avoid oscillatory behavior, a damping term proportional to
end-effector velocity was introduced:
ẽt = κt êt − γt ṗ, (27)
where κt is a unit translational stiffness, ṗ is the translational
end-effector velocity, and γt a damping coefficient.
2) Rotations: For rotations, the unit axis–angle representa-
tion êr = û0 θ̂0 was used (Equation (5)). The corresponding
elastic energy Er ∈ R of the virtual rotational spring is
Espring
r = 1
2 Kr∥êr∥2
. (28)
The work done by the external moment mext ∈ R3
about the
rotational displacement êr can be calculated by
Ework
r = ⟨mext, êr⟩. (29)
Equating the right hand sites of Equation (28) with Equa-
tion (29) results in the rotational stiffness contribution
k⋆
r =
2⟨mext, êr⟩
∥êr∥2
. (30)
Dynamic effects were addressed by augmenting the error with
a damping term:
ẽr = κr êr − γr ω, (31)
where κr is a unit rotational stiffness, ω is the angular end-
effector velocity, and γr a damping coefficient.
3) Algorithm: Algorithm 1 summarizes the procedure of
the stiffness estimation. Stiffness was computed over a sliding
window of 16 samples at 200 Hz (80 ms), which was sufficient
given that the tasks were not highly dynamic. Thresholds of
1 N for force and 1 Nm for moment were applied, and values
below these limits were ignored to suppress phases of low
interaction.
Algorithm 1 Energy-Based Stiffness Estimation
1: Input: êt, êr, ė, ω, fext, mext, κt, κr, γt, γr,
fthres, mthres, Kt,max, Kr,max, ε
2: for i ∈ {x, y, z} do
3: ẽt,i ← κt êt,i − γt ėi
4: if |fi| < fthres or ẽ2
t,i < ε then
5: k⋆
t,i ← 0
6: else
7: k⋆
t,i ←
2 fi ẽt,i
ẽ2
t,i + ε
8: k⋆
t,i ← max(0, k⋆
t,i)
9: end if
10: Kt,i ← clip Kt,max,i − k⋆
t,i, 0, Kt,max,i

11: ẽr,i ← κr êr,i − γr ωi
12: if |mi| < mthres or ẽ2
r,i < ε then
13: k⋆
r,i ← 0
14: else
15: k⋆
r,i ←
2 mi ẽr,i
ẽ2
r,i + ε
16: k⋆
r,i ← max(0, k⋆
r,i)
17: end if
18: Kr,i ← clip Kr,max,i − k⋆
r,i, 0, Kr,max,i

19: end for
20: Output: Kt, Kr
4) Directional Adaptation: For deployment of our model
in real-world experiments, the energy-based estimator was
extended with a directional adaptation step. A uniform re-
duction of stiffness in response to external perturbations can
prevent task execution, e. g., the end-effector may stop when
encountering an obstacle. To avoid this problem, stiffness
was modulated according to the directional relevance of each
axis with respect to the generated sZFT of the Diffusion
Model. The alignment factors below are defined relative to
p̂0 and û0θ̂0 contained in êt and êr, which are outputs of the
Diffusion Model. Hence, the adaptation mechanism depended
critically on the reconstructed sZFT: if the nominal free-space
ZFT were used directly, the alignment factors would not re-
flect the equilibrium under contact, and directional adaptation
would fail (Section IV).
For translations, the alignment factor
ψt,i =
|êt,i|
∥êt∥
, i ∈ {x, y, z} (32)
quantifies the contribution of each axis to the intended dis-
placement. Analogously, for rotations, we define
ψr,i =
|êr,i|
∥êr∥
, i ∈ {x, y, z}. (33)
The relative translational and rotational factors ρt,i and ρr,i
ensure that stiffness is decreased more strongly in directions
that contribute little to the desired motion, while remaining
close to the baseline stiffness along task-relevant axes:
ρt,i = 1 − ψt,i, (34a)
ρr,i = 1 − ψr,i. (34b)

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
10
The final adapted stiffness values kt,i and kr,i were imple-
mented as:
kt,i = Kt,i,max − ρt,i k⋆
t,i, (35a)
kr,i = Kr,i,max − ρr,i k⋆
r,i. (35b)
As will be shown in the next section, this mechanism
allowed the robot to move smoothly over obstacles in the
parkour task and to achieve successful in peg-in-hole insertion.
An overview of the proposed model architecture and work-
flow can be seen in Figure 8.
IV. DEPLOYMENT OF DIFFUSION MODEL ON REAL ROBOT
The model was deployed in two robotic use-cases designed
to evaluate its performance in contact-rich scenarios. In our
experiments, we deliberately focused on Impedance Control
rather than motion generation, since many real-world appli-
cations require active compliance, e. g., final assembly tasks
where vision is occluded and only tactile sensing is avail-
able. The first was a parkour-style task requiring continuous
interaction while traversing unknown obstacles. The second
was a peg-in-hole insertion task with increasing geometric
complexity.
The experiments were conducted on a KUKA LBR iiwa
with seven DOFs, using KUKA’s Fast Robot Interface (FRI)
for torque control with 5 ms sample time. Built-in gravity and
Coriolis/centrifugal compensation remained active through-
out. Robot kinematics and dynamics were computed via the
Exp[licit]-FRI interface4
[72]. A task-space impedance con-
troller was implemented (Section II-B). The external wrenches
were acquired with an ATI Gamma force/torque transducer,
mounted on the robot flange. The code of the robot controller
is publicly available on our public GitHub repository.
In both experiments, we compared a task-space impedance
controller with constant stiffness values against our proposed
diffusion-based directional stiffness adaptation. For all trials,
the baseline translational stiffness was identical to that used
during data collection and was set to 800 N
m , while the baseline
rotational stiffness was set to 150 Nm
rad . The same damping
design was applied throughout the experiments (Section II-B).
All workpieces were fabricated with a PRUSA i3 MK3 3D
printer using PLA filament. The expected manufacturing error
of the printer is on the order of 0.1 mm. All CAD models
used in the experiments are available on our GitHub repository.
Demonstration videos of both experiments are provided on the
project website.
All plotted entities are expressed in the spatially-fixed robot
base coordinate frame. The colors of the experimental plots are
consistent with the colors of the coordinate axes in Figure 9.
A. Parkour
The first experiment consisted of a parkour-style task in
which the robot traversed three obstacles while maintaining
continuous contact with the table (Figure 9, left). The desired
physical interaction behavior was demonstrated by a human
4https://GitHub.com/explicit-robotics/Explicit-FRI
operator during data collection (Section III-C), who teleoper-
ated the robot through the parkour task (Figure 6, right).
The nominal ZFT was generated by kinesthetic teaching of a
number of key joint poses. A MATLAB script then computed
the corresponding end-effector trajectory by smoothly inter-
polating between these configurations and manually shifting
the trajectory along the negative z-direction to ensure constant
contact with the table surface (see coordinate frame shown in
Figure 9, left). It is important to note that the resulting nominal
ZFT passed through the obstacles.
To protect the setup, stop conditions of ∥v∥ = 0.24 m
s
and ∥fext∥ = 20 N were defined. The constant-stiffness con-
troller already failed at the first obstacle: the end-effector was
stopped, energy accumulated in the virtual spring, and once
this energy was released the end-effector accelerated into the
velocity stop condition. Forces of up to 15 N were observed.
In contrast, with Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning, the
robot traversed all obstacles smoothly, i. e., without violating
the velocity or force stop conditions. The stiffness adaptation
mechanism prevented jamming in directions inconsistent with
the ZFT while preserving rigidity along task-relevant axes.
Figure 10 shows the measured external wrenches together
with the commanded translational and rotational stiffness val-
ues for the Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning. The bottom
plots illustrate the relative translational and rotational factors
(Equation (34)) and the work done by the external force along
the virtual displacement (Equations (25) and (29)).
During the entire motion, the stiffness values changed
dynamically in response to external wrenches. This con-
tinuous adaptation reflected the underlying Diffusion-Based
Impedance Learning, which enabled the robot to remain com-
pliant when unexpected contact occurred while maintaining
sufficient stiffness to progress through the parkour.
Translational stiffness was adapted asymmetrically depend-
ing on the directional contribution of forces. Around 12 s,
force peaks of 4 N along the y-axis and 15 N along the z-axes
arose. Nevertheless, Kp,y was reduced more strongly (reduced
to near 400 N/m) than Kp,z (remaining near 600 N/m) since
the relative translational factor along the z-axis was high. A
similar effect is visible near 30 s: while fy reached an absolute
of nearly 4 N with stiffness near 420 N/m, fz was only 2 N yet
stiffness dropped to about 200 N/m. These findings confirm
that stiffness reduction was not simply proportional to force
magnitude but was determined by the alignment with the sZFT,
predicted by the Diffusion Model.
Rotational stiffness also adapted directionally, with reduc-
tions depending on which axis contributed less to the sZFT.
Around 12 s, moments appeared simultaneously about the x-
and y-axes. Despite higher magnitudes about the x-axis, the
stiffness Kr,y was reduced more strongly, showing that y-axis
rotations were less important for the intended trajectory. This
selective modulation allowed the robot to maintain stability
while avoiding unnecessary resistance to contact.
B. Peg-In-Hole Insertion
The second experiment was a peg-in-hole insertion task with
three different peg types: cylindrical, square, and star pegs. The

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
11
Input Signals
External wrench
Position +
Unit-Quaternion
External wrench
𝒘
𝒆𝒙𝒕,𝒕%𝟏
𝒘
𝒆𝒙𝒕,𝒕
…
𝒘
𝒆𝒙𝒕,𝒕%𝟏𝟔
𝒑𝒆𝒙𝒕,𝒕%𝟏𝟔 𝒑𝒆𝒙𝒕,𝒕%𝟏 𝒑𝒆𝒙𝒕,𝒕
… Position
Embedding
Time
Embedding
Transformer
Encoder + MLP
sZFT
Reconstruction
Diffusion Model
Directional Adaptation
Stiffness (𝑲)
Stiffness Estimation
Energy-based Stiffness Estimation
Fig. 8: Overview of the proposed architecture and workflow. External wrenches and end-effector pose (position and unit-
quaternion) are processed as time-series inputs to a conditional Transformer-based Diffusion Model. External wrenches are
embedded as context tokens, while pose tokens are embedded with learned positional and diffusion-time encodings. The
Diffusion Model reconstructs a simulated Zero-Force Trajectory (sZFT), representing a contact-consistent equilibrium. This
reconstructed sZFT, together with the measured interaction signals, is passed to an energy-based stiffness estimator. Finally,
directional stiffness adaptation is applied according to the directional relevance of each coordinate axis.
nominal clearance between each peg and its corresponding
hole was 0.14 mm for the square peg and 0.20 mm for the
circular and star pegs. All workpieces were fabricated with
the same printer setup as for the parkour experiment. For all
trials, task success was defined as completely inserting the
peg.
For each peg type, the ZFT was generated from three man-
ually demonstrated robot joint configurations, via kinesthetic
teaching: a starting configuration, an initial contact (“touch”)
configuration, and a final insertion configuration. These config-
urations were recorded by physically guiding the robot through
the task. A smooth nominal ZFT was then generated using a
MATLAB script by computing the corresponding end-effector
poses and connecting them with a minimum-jerk interpolation.
To induce a controlled pulling force during the final insertion
phase, the equilibrium pose for final insertion was deliberately
shifted along the negative z-direction. After completing the
insertion, the robot moved straight upward along the z-axis
(see coordinate frame in Figure 9, right). Importantly, during
the touch pose the peg’s orientation was not aligned with the
edges of the square and star pegs. As a result, the nominal
ZFT did not encode any geometric alignment with the peg
shape.
The three peg types represent increasing geometric com-
plexity. The cylindrical peg is rotation-symmetric, which
makes the final orientation about the end-effector z-axis ir-
relevant. In contrast, the square and star pegs require precise
rotational alignment with an increasing number of edges,
which significantly increases task complexity.
This trend is reflected in the constant-stiffness experiments.
The cylindrical peg succeeded in 30/30 trials. The square peg
succeeded in 4/30 trials. The star peg failed in all 30 trials.
In practice, more complicated pegs like the square and star
peg often require extensive manual tuning of the ZFT, of the
impedance parameters, or both. This tuning is not only time-
consuming but there is also no standard method that guarantees
success. These results show that more complicated assembly
processes require more advanced strategies.
In contrast, Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning achieved
30/30 successful insertions for all three peg types. This result
was achieved by only demonstrating and interpolating three
key poses per trajectory. Hence, no advanced method for
trajectory generation was needed. Moreover, the outcome is
particularly notable because the training data included only
parkour and upper-limb rehabilitation data (Section III-C).
No peg-in-hole demonstrations were used for training. Im-
portantly, neither the Diffusion Model nor the impedance
controller is provided with any information about the peg or
hole geometry, pose, insertion axis, or clearance; all impedance
adaptation was driven solely by measured interaction wrenches
during the motion.
Across all three peg geometries, execution times remained
comparable despite the different contact conditions and inser-
tion complexities. Mean completion times for 30 trials were
10.8 ± 0.6 s for the circular peg, 10.2 ± 1.9 s for the square
peg, and 12.3 ± 1.9 s for the star-shaped peg.
Figure 11 shows the stiffness adaptation for the star peg.
Results for the other two pegs are provided in Appendix A.
During all experiments, force and moment thresholds were set
to 1 N and 1 Nm, respectively.

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
12
𝒚
𝒙
𝒛
1
3
2
𝒚
𝒙
𝒛
Ori Ins
𝑡
Fig. 9: Phases of the two experiments and the spatially fixed coordinate frames in which they are expressed. (Left) In the
parkour experiments, three obstacles are encountered (numbered 1–3). (Right) During peg insertion, the robot moved from the
starting pose to inclined contact with the hole (labeled “Ori”), followed by final insertion (with the start of insertion labeled
“Ins”). The colors of the major axes of the coordinate frames are shown in the experimental plots (Figure 10 and 11).
As illustrated in Figure 11, stiffness values were reduced in
response to external wrenches, with the amount of reduction
governed by the relative translational and rotational factors.
For most of the experiment, the relative translation factor along
the z axis remained higher than along the y axis. For instance,
at around 11 s, small forces of 0.5 N appeared along the y
axis. Nevertheless, the stiffness Kp,y was reduced to 600 N/m.
During retraction of the peg at around 16 s, it can be seen
that the relative translation factor along the z axis dropped
and consequently the stiffness Kp,z was reduced to 500 N/m.
In contrast, the relative translation factor along the x axis
increased and consequently the stiffness Kp,x was increased
to 700 N/m.
Due to the imperfect commanded ZFT, large moments about
the x- and y-axes occurred during execution. The relative
rotational factor about the z-axis remained low, leading to
substantial reductions in Kr,z, which even reached 0 N m
between 8 s to 12 s. For the x-axis, the moments were initially
small. When the moments increased significantly between 11 s
to 16 s, the controller maintained high stiffness, since the
relative rotational factor about the x-axis increased. A different
behavior can be observed for the y-axis: during 11 s to 17 s,
high moments reaching up to −10 N m occurred. Since the
relative rotational factor remained low, the stiffness dropped
and reached 0 N m.
C. Ablation Study
In addition to the two main controllers, we performed an
ablation study to isolate the contributions of the reconstructed
sZFT (Section III-A) and the directional impedance adaptation
(Section III-E).
Importantly, the nominal ZFT was kept fixed throughout
the ablation study. It was generated from simple kinesthetic
demonstrations and was not optimized for the two tasks and
pegs. Videos illustrating the kinesthetic teaching procedure for
the parkour and peg-in-hole tasks are provided on the project
website.
Specifically, we evaluated the following variants using the
baseline impedance parameters (800 N
m for translation and
150 Nm
rad for rotation):
1) Uniform stiffness adaptation without directional adapta-
tion, using the reconstructed sZFT
2) Directional stiffness adaptation computed from the nom-
inal ZFT
Uniform stiffness adaptation without directional modulation
failed in both experimental scenarios. In the parkour task, the
robot was blocked at the first obstacles, while none of the peg-
in-hole insertions succeeded. Directional adaptation derived
from the nominal ZFT also failed in contact-rich settings. In
the parkour task, the robot exceeded safety limits and stopped.
In the peg-in-hole experiments, this variant achieved 30/30
success only for the cylindrical peg, but failed for both the
square and star pegs.
These results confirm that directional adaptation alone is
insufficient if it is derived from the nominal ZFT. Instead,
directional factors must be computed relative to the recon-
structed sZFT for impedance adaptation to succeed.
To further evaluate how different uniform and non-uniform
fixed impedance parameters influence task success in the peg-
in-hole experiment, we additionally evaluated the following
variants:
a) Uniform high impedance: 800 N
m (translation), 150 Nm
rad

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
13
1 3
2 1 3
2
Fig. 10: Measured external wrenches and commanded translational and rotational stiffness during the parkour experiment with
stiffness adaptation. The relative translational and rotational factors show their respective contributions to stiffness modulation.
The bottom row reports the performed translational and rotational work (Equations (25) and (29)). Shaded gray regions denote
the three parkour obstacles. All quantities are expressed in the robot base frame; base-frame color coding and obstacle numbering
are shown in Figure 9.
(rotation)
b) Uniform medium impedance: 400 N
m (translation), 50 Nm
rad
(rotation)
c) Uniform low impedance: 200 N
m (translation), 7 Nm
rad
(rotation)
d) Best-found, manually tuned non-uniform impedance:
translation along z: 800 N
m ; translation along x and y:
350 N
m ; rotation about z: 5 Nm
rad ; rotation about x and y:
100 Nm
rad
For a) (uniform high impedance), the cylindrical peg suc-
ceeded in 30/30 trials, the square peg in 4/30 trials, and
the star peg failed in all trials. For b) (uniform medium
impedance), yielded 30/30 success for the cylindrical peg,
13/30 success for the square peg, and 5/30 success for the
star peg. For c) (uniform low impedance), it failed for all peg
types, as the wrench required to orient the peg with the hole
was insufficient.
For d) (manually tuned non-uniform impedance), the cylin-
drical peg succeeded in 30/30 trails, the square peg in 26/30
trials, and the star peg in 21/30 trials. These parameters were
identified by an experienced impedance control programmer
after testing 15 different parameter combinations. In contrast,
inexperienced users would likely struggle to identify a single
parameter set that performs robustly across all peg geometries.
Videos of all ablation experiments for the star peg example
are provided on our project website.
A summary of the ablation study for the peg-in-hole exper-
iment can be found in Table III.
V. DISCUSSION
The experimental results confirm the central goal of this
work: enabling robust contact-rich manipulation by bridging
the information and the energy domains and therefore unifying
state-of-the-art generative AI algorithms with model-based
control. In particular, the success of peg-in-hole insertions
with unseen tool and task geometries demonstrates that sZFT
reconstruction generalizes beyond the training distribution.
Compared to prior learning-based approaches, our frame-
work explicitly incorporates energy transformation, enabling
stable impedance adaptation under contact. Compared to tradi-
tional model-based impedance controllers, it gains adaptability
by reconstructing equilibrium trajectories directly from data.
This ability to bridge domains accounts for the strong perfor-
mance observed in unstructured environments.
Task success in contact-rich assembly is determined by
the interplay between the nominal motion reference and the
generated impedance, rather than by either component alone.
For the peg-in-hole experiments of this paper, the initial

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
14
Ori Ins Ori Ins
Fig. 11: Measured external wrenches and commanded translational and rotational stiffness during the peg-in-hole star insertion
experiment with stiffness adaptation. The relative translational and rotational factors show their respective contributions to
stiffness modulation. The bottom row reports the performed translational and rotational work (Equations (25) and (29)). The
shaded gray region denotes the insertion phase. All quantities are expressed in the robot base frame; base-frame color coding
is shown in Figure 9.
TABLE III: Peg-in-hole success rates for the ablation study. All results are reported over 30 trials.
Controller Variant Cylindrical Peg Square Peg Star Peg
Time-varying Impedance
Diffusion Model (with directional adaptation) 100% 100% 100%
Diffusion Model w/o directional adaptation 0% 0% 0%
Directional adaptation w/o DM (nominal ZFT) 100% 0% 0%
Fixed Impedance
Uniform high (baseline) 100% 13% 0%
Uniform medium 100% 43% 17%
Uniform low 0% 0% 0%
Best-found non-uniform 100% 87% 70%
contact (“touch”) phase is particularly important because it
establishes the conditions for the subsequent orientation and
insertion phases. Nevertheless, the proposed framework ex-
hibited considerable robustness to variations in the nominal
trajectory. For both the cylindrical and square pegs, successful
insertion was achieved for lateral offsets of up to approxi-
mately ±3 mm in the x and y directions. Even for the more
demanding star-shaped peg, which requires accurate rotational
alignment, successful insertion remained possible for offsets
of approximately ±1 mm. This observation is consistent with
the findings reported in [73].
A key element of the framework is directional stiffness
adaptation. This mechanism is generic and can be tailored to
applications in other domains. One example is robotic-assisted
upper-limb therapy, where stiffness must remain high along
non-movement directions, while stiffness along the intended
movement direction should adapt depending on whether the
patient can execute the motion independently. In such settings,
the same framework can be used by solely adapting the
directional stiffness adaptation.
The force and moment thresholds in the stiffness estimator
affect the responsiveness of impedance adaptation. In our
experiments, values of 1 N and 1 Nm were selected to
match the noise characteristics of the ATI Gamma force/torque
sensor. These thresholds are not task-specific and can be
adjusted for different sensors or applications.
At present, the adaptive impedance controller outputs diag-
onal, positive semidefinite stiffness matrices. This design sim-

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
15
plifies analysis and implementation but omits cross-coupling
effects that have proven beneficial in traditional solutions such
as remote-center compliance (RCC) devices [74], [75]. For
more complex assembly tasks, integrating coupled stiffness
parameters may further enhance robustness and alignment
accuracy. Exploring this extension is an important direction
for future work.
In this study, the baseline impedance behavior used during
teleoperation was preserved during deployment, ensuring con-
sistency between the demonstrations used for training and the
interaction conditions encountered during execution. Future
work should investigate robustness to changes in baseline
impedance, including deployment with substantially different
stiffness settings than those used during data collection. Such
experiments would provide further insight into the ability of
the learned model to generalize across different compliant
behaviors and controller parameterizations.
The proposed approach guarantees passivity when stiffness
is reduced: lowering stiffness dissipates stored potential en-
ergy and ensures that interaction with a passive environment
remains output strictly passive. However, when stiffness is
increased back toward the baseline, passivity is not generally
guaranteed, as such changes can inject additional energy when-
ever displacements are nonzero. In these cases, the controller
can be combined with previous work on passive impedance
shaping [2] to enforce strict passivity.
In our work, we adopt a Transformer-based Diffusion Model
due to its ability to capture long range temporal dependencies
and flexibly condition on multimodal interaction signals. Fu-
ture work should investigate a systematic comparison with al-
ternative architectures such as convolutional or hybrid models
under matched parameter and computational budgets.
Overall, our findings demonstrate that Diffusion-Based
Impedance Learning is highly effective in the experimental
setups investigated. While this provides strong evidence for
the viability of the approach, further studies across a wider
range of tasks and environments are needed to fully establish
its generality. Nevertheless, the framework offers a promising
design principle for stable, safe, and adaptable robot interac-
tion in other domains including industrial assembly, physical
Human-Robot Interaction, and robotic-assisted rehabilitation.
VI. CONCLUSION
This work introduced Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning,
a framework that unifies generative trajectory models in the
information domain with adaptive impedance regulation in
the energy domain. By reconstructing simulated Zero-Force
Trajectories (sZFTs) from contact-perturbed displacements
and external wrench signals, the method enables real-time
impedance adaptation for contact-rich manipulation.
The framework consistently outperformed fixed and heuris-
tic strategies in experiments on a KUKA LBR iiwa. It enabled
smooth traversal of obstacle-rich parkour environments where
conventional impedance control failed, and achieved 30/30
success rates in cylindrical, square, and star peg-in-hole inser-
tions without any task-specific demonstrations in the training
data. The experiments in this work intentionally withhold ge-
ometric information from the controller, targeting scenarios in
which such knowledge is unavailable or unreliable due to un-
structured environments. Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning
should therefore be understood as a general, interaction-driven
alternative rather than a replacement for highly engineered
solutions in fully structured assembly lines.
Beyond these results, Diffusion-Based Impedance Learning
establishes a general interface between learning and model-
based control. It extends the role of generative models from
visuomotor trajectory planning to physical interaction, demon-
strating that contact-rich manipulation can be learned from
relatively small datasets while maintaining real-time control
performance.
Looking ahead, we aim to extend this framework from
single-arm to dual-arm setups. While this work focuses on
impedance learning and used a fixed ZFT, Diffusion-Based
Impedance Learning can naturally be embedded in hierarchical
architectures that couple high-level visuomotor motion policies
with low-level impedance regulation.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Hogan, “Physical interaction via dynamic primitives,” in Geometric
and numerical foundations of movements. Springer, 2017, pp. 269–299.
[2] J. Lachner, F. Allmendinger, S. Stramigioli, and N. Hogan, “Shaping
impedances to comply with constrained task dynamics,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Robotics, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2750–2767, 2022.
[3] J. Lachner, M. C. Nah, and N. Hogan, “A physically consistent stiffness
formulation for contact-rich manipulation,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 0, no. 0, p. 02783649251393332, 0.
[4] J. Lachner, F. Allmendinger, E. Hobert, N. Hogan, and S. Stramigioli,
“Energy budgets for coordinate invariant robot control in physical hu-
man–robot interaction,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 40, no. 8-9, pp. 968–985, Aug. 2021.
[5] N. Hogan, “Stable execution of contact tasks using impedance control,”
in Proceedings. 1987 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, vol. 4. IEEE, 1987, pp. 1047–1054.
[6] J. Lachner, “A geometric approach to robotic manipulation in physical
human-robot interaction,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Twente,
2022.
[7] S. Stramigioli, Ed., Energy-Aware Robotics, ser. Mathematical Control
Theory I. Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2015, vol.
461.
[8] H. v. Helmholtz, “II. über einige gesetze der vertheilung elektrischer
ströme in körperlichen leitern mit anwendung auf die thierisch-
elektrischen versuche,” Annalen der Physik und Chemie, vol. 89, no. 6,
pp. 211–233, 1853, english translation: “Some laws concerning the
distribution of electrical currents in conductors with applications to
experiments on animal electricity”.
[9] N. Hogan, “A general actuator model based on nonlinear equivalent
networks,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 19, no. 6,
pp. 1929–1939, 2014.
[10] M. C. Nah, J. Lachner, and N. Hogan, “Robot control based on motor
primitives: A comparison of two approaches,” The International Journal
of Robotics Research, vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 1959–1991, 2024.
[11] M. C. Nah, J. Lachner, F. Tessari, and N. Hogan, “On the modularity of
elementary dynamic actions,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2024, pp. 1398–1405.
[12] N. Hogan, “Impedance control-an approach to manipulation. i-theory.
ii-implementation. iii-applications,” ASME Journal of Dynamic Systems
and Measurement Control B, vol. 107, pp. 1–24, 1985.
[13] J. Collins, D. Howard, and J. Leitner, “Quantifying the reality gap
in robotic manipulation tasks,” in 2019 International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2019, pp. 6706–6712.
[14] M. Posa, C. Cantu, and R. Tedrake, “A direct method for trajectory
optimization of rigid bodies through contact,” The International Journal
of Robotics Research, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 69–81, 2014.
[15] Z. Manchester and S. Kuindersma, “Variational contact-implicit tra-
jectory optimization,” in Robotics Research: The 18th International
Symposium ISRR. Springer, 2020, pp. 985–1000.

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
16
[16] T. Pang, H. T. Suh, L. Yang, and R. Tedrake, “Global planning for
contact-rich manipulation via local smoothing of quasi-dynamic contact
models,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2023.
[17] T. Marcucci, R. Deits, M. Gabiccini, A. Bicchi, and R. Tedrake,
“Approximate hybrid model predictive control for multi-contact push
recovery in complex environments,” in 2017 IEEE-RAS 17th interna-
tional conference on humanoid robotics (Humanoids). IEEE, 2017, pp.
31–38.
[18] F. R. Hogan and A. Rodriguez, “Reactive planar non-prehensile manip-
ulation with hybrid model predictive control,” The International Journal
of Robotics Research, vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 755–773, 2020.
[19] M. Anitescu and F. A. Potra, “Formulating dynamic multi-rigid-body
contact problems with friction as solvable linear complementarity prob-
lems,” equivalentlinear Dynamics, vol. 14, pp. 231–247, 1997.
[20] A. Aydinoglu and M. Posa, “Real-time multi-contact model predictive
control via admm,” in 2022 International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2022, pp. 3414–3421.
[21] H. J. T. Suh, T. Pang, and R. Tedrake, “Bundled gradients through
contact via randomized smoothing,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 4000–4007, 2022.
[22] H. J. T. Suh, T. Pang, T. Zhao, and R. Tedrake, “Dexterous contact-rich
manipulation via the contact trust region,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.02291
[23] Y. Li, G. Ganesh, N. Jarrassé, S. Haddadin, A. Albu-Schaeffer, and
E. Burdet, “Force, impedance, and trajectory learning for contact tooling
and haptic identification,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 34, no. 5,
pp. 1170–1182, 2018.
[24] Y. Li, L. Zheng, Y. Wang, E. Dong, and S. Zhang, “Impedance learning-
based adaptive force tracking for robot on unknown terrains,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 41, pp. 1404–1420, 2025.
[25] S. Shaw, B. Abbatematteo, and G. Konidaris, “Rmps for safe
impedance control in contact-rich manipulation,” 2022. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.12103
[26] A. S. Anand, J. T. Gravdahl, and F. J. Abu-Dakka, “Model-based variable
impedance learning control for robotic manipulation,” Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, vol. 170, p. 104531, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921889023001707
[27] Y. Michel, M. Saveriano, and D. Lee, “A novel safety-aware energy
tank formulation based on control barrier functions,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 5206–5213, 2024.
[28] F. Abi-Farraj, T. Osa, N. P. J. Peters, G. Neumann, and P. R. Gior-
dano, “A learning-based shared control architecture for interactive task
execution,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2017, pp. 329–335.
[29] M. Najafi, K. Adams, and M. Tavakoli, “Robotic learning from demon-
stration of therapist’s time-varying assistance to a patient in trajectory-
following tasks,” in International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics
(ICORR), 2017, pp. 888–894.
[30] E. Theodorou, J. Buchli, and S. Schaal, “A generalized path integral
control approach to reinforcement learning,” The Journal of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 11, pp. 3137–3181, 2010.
[31] M. Kalakrishnan, S. Chitta, E. Theodorou, P. Pastor, and S. Schaal,
“Stomp: Stochastic trajectory optimization for motion planning,” in 2011
IEEE international conference on robotics and automation. IEEE, 2011,
pp. 4569–4574.
[32] F. Stulp, E. A. Theodorou, and S. Schaal, “Reinforcement learning
with sequences of motion primitives for robust manipulation,” IEEE
Transactions on robotics, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 1360–1370, 2012.
[33] G. Williams, A. Aldrich, and E. A. Theodorou, “Model predictive
path integral control: From theory to parallel computation,” Journal of
Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 344–357, 2017.
[34] Q. Yang, A. Dürr, E. A. Topp, J. A. Stork, and T. Stoyanov, “Variable
impedance skill learning for contact-rich manipulation,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 8391–8398, 2022.
[35] A. B. Tahmaz, R. Prakash, and J. Kober, “Impedance primitive-
augmented hierarchical reinforcement learning for sequential tasks,”
2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.19607
[36] N. Hogan, “Impedance control: An approach to manipulation — part i:
Theory,” Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control, vol.
107, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 1985.
[37] C. Chi, S. Feng, Y. Du, Z. Xu, E. Cousineau, B. Burchfiel, and S. Song,
“Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04137, 2023.
[38] M. Braun, N. Jaquier, L. Rozo, and T. Asfour, “Riemannian flow
matching policy for robot motion learning,” 10 2024, pp. 5144–5151.
[39] F. Zhang and M. Gienger, “Affordance-based robot manipulation with
flow matching,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.
01083
[40] M. Shridhar, L. Manuelli, and D. Fox, “Perceiver-actor: A multi-task
transformer for robotic manipulation,” in Conference on Robot Learning
(CoRL), 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.05451
[41] M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair,
R. Rafailov, E. Foster, G. Lam, P. Sanketi, Q. Vuong, T. Kollar, B. Burch-
fiel, R. Tedrake, D. Sadigh, S. Levine, P. Liang, and C. Finn, “Open-
vla: An open-source vision-language-action model,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
[42] T. L. Team, J. Barreiros, A. Beaulieu, A. Bhat, R. Cory, E. Cousineau,
H. Dai, C.-H. Fang, K. Hashimoto, M. Z. Irshad, M. Itkina,
N. Kuppuswamy, K.-H. Lee, K. Liu, D. McConachie, I. McMahon,
H. Nishimura, C. Phillips-Grafflin, C. Richter, P. Shah, K. Srinivasan,
B. Wulfe, C. Xu, M. Zhang, A. Alspach, M. Angeles, K. Arora,
V. C. Guizilini, A. Castro, D. Chen, T.-S. Chu, S. Creasey, S. Curtis,
R. Denitto, E. Dixon, E. Dusel, M. Ferreira, A. Goncalves, G. Gould,
D. Guoy, S. Gupta, X. Han, K. Hatch, B. Hathaway, A. Henry,
H. Hochsztein, P. Horgan, S. Iwase, D. Jackson, S. Karamcheti,
S. Keh, J. Masterjohn, J. Mercat, P. Miller, P. Mitiguy, T. Nguyen,
J. Nimmer, Y. Noguchi, R. Ong, A. Onol, O. Pfannenstiehl,
R. Poyner, L. P. M. Rocha, G. Richardson, C. Rodriguez, D. Seale,
M. Sherman, M. Smith-Jones, D. Tago, P. Tokmakov, M. Tran,
B. V. Hoorick, I. Vasiljevic, S. Zakharov, M. Zolotas, R. Ambrus,
K. Fetzer-Borelli, B. Burchfiel, H. Kress-Gazit, S. Feng, S. Ford,
and R. Tedrake, “A careful examination of large behavior models
for multitask dexterous manipulation,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.05331
[43] Y. Hou, Z. Liu, C. Chi, E. Cousineau, N. Kuppuswamy, S. Feng,
B. Burchfiel, and S. Song, “Adaptive compliance policy: Learning
approximate compliance for diffusion guided control,” in 2025 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE,
2025, pp. 4829–4836.
[44] Y. Park and P. Agrawal, “Using apple vision pro to train and control
robots,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/Improbable-AI/
VisionProTeleop
[45] M. Janner, Y. Du, J. B. Tenenbaum, and S. Levine, “Planning with
diffusion for flexible behavior synthesis,” in Proceedings of the 39th
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.
[46] A. Nichol and P. Dhariwal, “Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09672, 2021.
[47] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11239, 2020.
[48] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli,
“Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics,” in
Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning,
ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, F. Bach and D. Blei,
Eds., vol. 37. Lille, France: PMLR, 07–09 Jul 2015, pp. 2256–2265.
[49] P. Holderrieth and E. Erives, “An introduction to flow matching and
diffusion models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02070, 2025.
[50] X. Liu, K. Y. Ma, C. Gao, and M. Z. Shou, “Diffusion models in
robotics: A survey,” TechRxiv, April 2025.
[51] U. A. Mishra and Y. Chen, “Reorientdiff: Diffusion model based
reorientation for object manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12700,
2023.
[52] J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon, “Denoising diffusion implicit models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
[53] R. Wolf, Y. Shi, S. Liu, and R. Rayyes, “Diffusion models for robotic
manipulation: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08438, 2025.
[54] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 30, 2017.
[55] Y. Liang, H. Wen, Y. Nie, Y. Jiang, M. Jin, D. Song, S. Pan, and Q. Wen,
“Foundation models for time series analysis: A tutorial and survey,”
in Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, ser. KDD ’24. ACM, Aug. 2024, p.
6555–6565.
[56] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai,
T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly,
J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby, “An image is worth 16x16 words: Trans-
formers for image recognition at scale,” in International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2021.
[57] A. Jaegle, F. Gimeno, A. Brock, O. Vinyals, A. Zisserman, and
J. Carreira, “Perceiver: General perception with iterative attention,” in
Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
17
ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, M. Meila and T. Zhang,
Eds., vol. 139. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021, pp. 4651–4664.
[58] T. Wang, A. Roberts, D. Hesslow, T. L. Scao, H. W. Chung, I. Belt-
agy, J. Launay, and C. Raffel, “What language model architecture
and pretraining objective work best for zero-shot generalization?” in
Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), vol. 162. PMLR, 2022, pp. 23 671–23 694.
[59] T. Lin, Y. Wang, X. Liu, and X. Qiu, “A survey of transformers,” AI
Open, vol. 3, pp. 111–132, 2022.
[60] A. Kramberger, E. Shahriari, A. Gams, B. Nemec, A. Ude, and S. Had-
dadin, “Passivity based iterative learning of admittance-coupled dynamic
movement primitives for interaction with changing environments,” in
2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), 2018, pp. 6023–6028.
[61] N. Hogan, “A general actuator model based on nonlinear equivalent
networks,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2014, pp. 2647–2653.
[62] ——, “Impedance and interaction control,” in 2015 IEEE-RAS 15th
International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids). IEEE,
2015, pp. 1–7.
[63] J. Lachner, F. Allmendinger, E. Hobert, N. Hogan, and S. Stramigioli,
“Energy budgets for coordinate invariant robot control in physical hu-
man–robot interaction,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 40, no. 8-9, pp. 968–985, 2021.
[64] A. Albu-Schaffer, C. Ott, U. Frese, and G. Hirzinger, “Cartesian
impedance control of redundant robots: recent results with the DLR-
light-weight-arms,” IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, pp. 3704–3709, 2003.
[65] K. Shoemake, “Animating rotation with quaternion curves,” SIGGRAPH
Comput. Graph., vol. 19, no. 3, p. 245–254, Jul. 1985.
[66] S. Schaal, “Is imitation learning the route to humanoid robots?” Trends
in cognitive sciences, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 233–242, 1999.
[67] A. J. Ijspeert, J. Nakanishi, H. Hoffmann, P. Pastor, and S. Schaal,
“Dynamical movement primitives: learning attractor models for motor
behaviors,” Neural computation, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 328–373, 2013.
[68] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake,
and S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action
diffusion,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, 2024.
[69] C. M. Bishop, “Training with noise is equivalent to tikhonov regular-
ization,” Neural Computation, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 108–116, 01 1995.
[70] J. Lachner, F. Tessari, A. M. W. Jr., M. C. Nah, and N. Hogan,
“Divide et impera: Decoding impedance strategies for robotic peg-in-
hole assembly,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.01054, 2025.
[71] J. Carvalho, A. T. Le, M. Baierl, D. Koert, and J. Peters, “Motion
planning diffusion: Learning and planning of robot motions with diffu-
sion models,” in 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2023, pp. 1916–1923.
[72] J. Lachner, M. C. Nah, S. Stramigioli, and N. Hogan, “Exp [licit] an ed-
ucational robot modeling software based on exponential maps,” in 2024
IEEE International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics
(AIM). IEEE, 2024, pp. 1359–1366.
[73] J. Lachner, M. C. Nah, F. Tessari, and N. Hogan, “Elementary dynamic
actions: key structures for contact-rich manipulation,” in IROS 2023
Workshop on Leveraging Models for Contact-Rich Manipulation, 2023.
[74] D. E. Whitney, “Quasi-Static Assembly of Compliantly Supported
Rigid Parts,” Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and
Control, vol. 104, no. 1, pp. 65–77, 03 1982. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3149634
[75] S. Hirai and K. Tanie, “Remote center compliance with adaptive com-
pliance control,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation. IEEE, 1990, pp. 468–473.
APPENDIX A
PEG-IN-HOLE EXPERIMENTS
This appendix complements the main results by reporting
stiffness adaptation for the circular and square pegs. The
corresponding results for the star peg are already presented in
the main text (Figure 11). The experimental setup, controllers,
and parameters matched the main text: baseline stiffness
Kt,i,max = 800 N/m and Kr,i,max = 150 Nm/rad, damping as
in Appendix II-B1, and force/moment thresholds of 1 N and
1 Nm. All quantities are expressed in the robot base frame.
For the circular peg, rotational symmetry about the end-
effector z-axis makes the final yaw alignment irrelevant.
Stiffness modulation is therefore dominated by translational
factors, with only minor rotational adjustments. For the square
peg, alignment with the edges increased sensitivity to off-
axis contact. This yielded stronger directional reductions in
both translation and rotation when axes contributed little to
the sZFT, while stiffness remained high along task-relevant
directions.
Noah Geiger received the B.Sc. degree in Mechan-
ical Engineering and the M.Sc. degree in Mecha-
tronics and Information Technology, with a special-
ization in robotics, from the Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany, in 2022 and
2025, respectively. He was a Visiting Researcher at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT),
Cambridge, MA, USA. He was awarded an Engi-
neering Scholarship from ERGO Direkt AG and an
IT Scholarship from Festo GmbH & Co. KG during
his studies, as well as the DPG Abiturpreis. He
began his professional experience as a Student Assistant at KIT, working
on human pose estimation, and as a Working Student and Bachelor’s Can-
didate with Schaeffler, Karlsruhe, Germany, where he worked on machine
learning for vehicle control systems. He then worked as a Data Scientist
with Mercedes-Benz, Sindelfingen, Germany, focusing on scene understanding
and end-to-end neural networks for autonomous driving, and as a Robotics
Engineer with Bosch, Plymouth, MI, USA, where he implemented a mobile
robot system for radar sensor validation. Since October 2025, he has been with
the Junior Managers Program (AI/IT Track), Robert Bosch GmbH, Stuttgart,
Germany, a program that prepares participants for leadership responsibility.
His research interests include robotics, agentic AI, diffusion models, and
physical AI. Mr. Geiger is Founder and Lead of the Studopolis Think Tank
and was previously a Member of the Board of MIT VISTA.
Tamim Asfour (Fellow, IEEE) is Full Professor
of Humanoid Robotics at Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology (KIT), Germany. He directs the High
Performance Humanoid Technologies Lab (H2T) at
the Institute of Anthropomatics and Robotics. He
received a diploma in Electrical Engineering from
the University of Karlsruhe and a Ph.D. degree
from KIT. His research focuses on the engineering
humanoid robot systems that integrates artificial in-
telligence, informatics, and mechatronics to perform
versatile tasks in the real world while learning from
humans, experience and interaction with the environment. Tamim is the
developer of the ARMAR humanoid robot family. He has been a visiting
professor at Georgia Tech, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology,
and the National University of Singapore. He is a IEEE Fellow, Editor-in-Chief
of the Robotics and Automation Letters (RA-L), Founding Editor-in-Chief of
the IEEE-RAS Humanoids Conference Editorial Board, the Spokesperson of
the Robotics Institute Germany (RIG), and the scientific spokesperson of the
KIT Center “Information · Systems · Technologies” (KCIST).

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
18
Fig. 12: Cylindrical peg insertion with stiffness adaptation. External wrenches, commanded translational and rotational stiffness,
and relative motion factors are shown in the robot base frame. Base-frame color coding is given in Figure 9.
Neville Hogan (Member, IEEE) is Sun Jae Pro-
fessor of Mechanical Engineering and Professor of
Brain and Cognitive Sciences at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. He earned a Diploma in
Engineering (with distinction) from Dublin Institute
of Technology and M.S., Mechanical Engineer and
Ph.D. degrees from MIT. He joined MIT’s faculty in
1979 and presently directs the Newman Laboratory
for Biomechanics and Human Rehabilitation. He
co-founded Interactive Motion Technologies, subse-
quently part of Bionik Laboratories. His research
includes robotics, motor neuroscience, and rehabilitation engineering, empha-
sizing the control of physical contact and dynamic interaction. Awards include:
Honorary Doctorates from Delft University of Technology and Dublin Institute
of Technology; the Silver Medal of the Royal Academy of Medicine in
Ireland; the Saint Patrick’s Day Medal for Academia from Science Foundation
Ireland; the Henry M. Paynter Outstanding Investigator Award and the Rufus
T. Oldenburger Medal from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
Dynamic Systems and Control Division; and from the Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers, the Academic Career Achievement Award from
the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society and the Pioneer in Robotics
Award from the Robotics and Automation Society.
Johannes Lachner (Member, IEEE) is an incom-
ing Assistant Professor with the Elmore Family
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering at
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. He is
currently a Postdoctoral Researcher with the De-
partment of Mechanical Engineering and the De-
partment of Brain and Cognitive Sciences at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). He
received the M.Eng. double degree (with distinction)
in Mechatronic Systems from the University of
Ulster, Belfast, UK, and the University of Applied
Sciences Augsburg, Germany, and the Ph.D. degree (with highest distinction)
in Robotics from the University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands. Prior
to MIT, he was a Senior Research Engineer with the Corporate Research
Department, KUKA Robotics GmbH, where he invented numerous patents
in robotics, several of which have been transferred into commercial products.
His research focuses on rehabilitation robotics, motor neuroscience, and AI for
physical human–robot interaction, with an emphasis on geometric methods for
contact-rich robot control and robot learning from human physical interaction.
He received the MIT–Novo Nordisk AI Fellowship Award, the IROS Best
Paper Award 2024, and two consecutive TU Munich Global Incentive Fund
awards. He was a finalist for the European Georges Giralt Ph.D. Award for
the best European Ph.D. thesis in robotics.

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
19
Fig. 13: Square peg insertion with stiffness adaptation. External wrenches, commanded translational and rotational stiffness,
and relative motion factors are shown in the robot base frame. Base-frame color coding is given in Figure 9.
